## Scientific Structuralism

## BOSTON STUDIES IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE

## Editors

ROBERT S. COHEN, Boston University JÜRgEN RENN, Max Planck Institute for the History of Science KOSTaS gavROgLU, University of Athens

## Editorial Advisory Board

THOmaS F. gLICK, Boston University aDOLF gRÜNBaUm, University of Pittsburgh SYLvaN S. SCHwEBER, Brandeis University JOHN J. STaCHEL, Boston University maRx w. waRTOFSKY † , ( Editor 1960-1997 )

vOLUmE 281

For further volumes: http://www.springer.com/series/5710

Peter Bokulich ● alisa Bokulich Editors

## Scientific Structuralism

<!-- image -->

Editors Peter Bokulich Boston University Boston, ma USa pbokulic@bu.edu alisa Bokulich Boston University Boston, ma USa abokulic@bu.edu

ISBN 978-90-481-9596-1 e-ISBN 978-90-481-9597-8 DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-9597-8 Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg London New York

Library of Congress Control Number: PCN applied for

## © Springer Science+Business media B.v. 2011

No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,  electronic,  mechanical,  photocopying,  microfilming,  recording  or  otherwise,  without  written permission from the Publisher, with the exception of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.

Printed on acid-free paper

Springer is part of Springer Science+Business media (www.springer.com)

## For Julian and Kai

wwwwww ww

## Contents

| 1                                                                                                                       | Structural Realism: A Neo-Kantian Perspective ................................... michela massimi                                                     |   1 |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|
| 2                                                                                                                       | In Defence of Ontic Structural Realism .................................................. Steven French and James Ladyman                             |  25 |
| 3                                                                                                                       | Structuralist Approaches to Physics: Objects, Models and Modality ................................................................. Katherine Brading |  43 |
| 4                                                                                                                       | Mathematical Structural Realism ........................................................... Christopher Pincock                                       |  67 |
| 5                                                                                                                       | Structural Empiricism, Again .................................................................. Otávio Bueno                                          |  81 |
| 6                                                                                                                       | Structural Realism: Continuity and Its Limits ...................................... Ioannis votsis                                                   | 105 |
| 7                                                                                                                       | Structuralism About Scientific Representation ...................................... martin Thomson-Jones                                             | 119 |
| 8                                                                                                                       | Ontic Structural Realism as a Metaphysics of Objects ......................... michael Esfeld and vincent Lam                                         | 143 |
| 9                                                                                                                       | Scientific Explanation and Scientific Structuralism .............................. mauro Dorato and Laura Felline                                     | 161 |
| Index ................................................................................................................. | Index .................................................................................................................                               | 177 |

wwwwww

## Contributors

| Katherine Brading Department of Philosophy, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, USa, kbrading@nd.edu                           |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Otávio Bueno Department of Philosophy, University of miami, Coral gables, FL 33124, USa, otaviobueno@mac.com                     |
| Mauro Dorato Dipartimento di Filosofia, Università degli Studi Roma Tre, Rome, Italy, dorato@uniroma3.it                         |
| Michael Esfeld University of Lausanne, Department of Philosophy, michael-andreas.Esfeld@unil.ch                                  |
| Laura Felline Dipartimento di Scienze Pedagogiche e Filosofiche, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy             |
| Steven French Department of Philosophy, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK, s.r.d.french@leeds.ac.uk                        |
| James Ladyman Department of Philosophy, University of Bristol, Bristol, avon BS8 1TH, UK                                         |
| Michela Massimi Department of Science and Technology Studies, University College London, London wC1E 6BT, UK, m.massimi@ud.ec.uk |
| Christopher Pincock Department of Philosophy, Purdue University, west Lafayette, IN 47907, USa, chrispincock@gmail.com           |

## Martin Thomson-Jones

Department of Philosophy, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH 44074

## Ioannis Votsis

Philosophisches Institut, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Universitütstrasse 1, Duesseldorf 40225, germany votsis@phil-fak.uni-duesseldorf.de

## Vincent Lam

University of Queensland, School of mathematics and Physics and School of History Philosophy, Religion and Classics, v.lam@uq.edu.au

## Introduction to Scientific Structuralism

Scientific structuralism is a label used to describe a broad family of approaches that emphasize the structural features of scientific theories as a way of addressing particular epistemological and ontological problems in the philosophy of science. articulating what precisely these structural features are is one of the central projects of scientific structuralism, and different authors have defined this central notion in different ways. Intuitively, the structural features of a scientific theory are to be contrasted with its ontology, where structure is understood broadly as the relations between elements. In the mathematical sciences, structure is often described as the relations that are captured in the theory's equations. So, for example, rather than being committed to the existence of electrons (the ontology of the theory), the structural realist is committed to  the  reality  of  the  relations  between  electronic  phenomena that are described by maxwell's equations, and arguably those relations are preserved in the move from classical  electrodynamics  to  quantum  electrodynamics.  while  some  structuralists have borrowed the mathematical notion of structure from set theory, other structuralists have tried to define a more robust metaphysical notion of structure (for a defense of non-formal notions of structure see Chapter 7 by Thomson-Jones, and for a critique of realist approaches to defining structure see Chapter 5 by Bueno).

There  are  several  historical  antecedents  to  contemporary  scientific  structuralism.    For  example,  Henri  Poincaré  (1854-1912)  writes  in  his  book Science and Hypothesis ,

Now, we daily see what science is doing for us. This could not be unless it taught us something about reality; the aim of science is not things themselves, as the dogmatists in their simplicity  imagine,  but  the  relations  between  things;  outside  those  relations  there  is  no reality knowable. (Poincaré [1905] 1952, xxiv)

we see Poincaré here emphasizing that what science gets right about the world is not its detailed ontology, but rather its structural features. moreover, he argues that this is the best that science can do-our knowledge is limited to these structural or relational features.

Ernst Cassirer (1874-1945) has similarly argued for a reorientation of the goals of science, though he approaches his structuralism through a neo-Kantian, rather than  a  conventionalist  perspective.  Cassirer  notes  that  there  has  been  a  trend  in fields like physics towards an increasingly abstract and mathematical characterization of objects and substance. He notes,

This progressive transformation must appear unintelligible, if we place the goal of natural science in gaining the most perfect possible copy of outer reality. It is only owing to the fact that science abandons the attempt to give a direct, sensuous copy of reality, that science is able  to  represent  this  reality  as  a  necessary  connection  of  grounds  and  consequents.  .  .  . Instead of imagining behind the world of perceptions a new existence built up out of the materials of sensation, it traces the universal intellectual schemata, in which the relations and connections of perceptions can be perfectly represented. atom and ether, mass and force are nothing but examples of such schemata, and fulfill their purpose so much the better, the less they contain of direct perceptual content. (Cassirer [1923] 1953, pp. 164-165)

In other words, the goal of science is simply to represent these 'relations and connections,'  rather  than  reality  as  we  experience  it.  Indeed  Cassirer  seems  to  go  a  step further in encouraging us to abandon the view of a reality behind our experience, and instead to reconceptualize objects such as atoms in relational terms as 'schemata.'

Yet  a  third  important  influence  on  contemporary  scientific  structuralism  is Bertrand Russell (1872-1970), who arguably had the most fully developed account of structural realism of these early authors. In his book The Problems of Philosophy , Russell writes,

Thus we find that, although the relations of  physical objects have all sorts of knowable properties, derived from their correspondence with the relations of sense-data, the physical objects themselves remain unknown in their intrinsic nature, so far at least as can be discovered by means of the senses. (Russell [1912] 1959, p. 34)

## again in his later work The Analysis of Matter he emphasizes,

Thus it would seem that, wherever we infer from perceptions it is only structure that we can validly  infer;  and  structure  is  what  can  be  expressed  by  mathematical  logic,  which includes mathematics. (Russell 1927, p. 254)

Like other scientific structuralists, Russell argues that our knowledge is limited to the structural features of the world, and that physical objects themselves remain unknowable. (The historical influence of these figures on the contemporary scientific  structuralism  literature  is  further  explored  in  Chapter  1  by  massimi  and Chapter 2 by French and Ladyman).

much of the recent revival of interest in scientific structuralism can be attributed to John worrall's seminal essay, 'Structural Realism: The Best of Both worlds,' which breathed new life into an otherwise languishing realism debate at the end of the 1980s. On the one hand worrall argues that structural realism can account for the realist's 'no miracles' argument, according to which the remarkable successes of science would be an unexplained 'miracle' if our current theories were not at least basically true. On the other hand structural realism can also make sense of the antirealist's so-called 'pessimistic meta-induction', which points out that almost all of  science's  past  ontological  claims  have  turned  out  to  be  false  (e.g.,  the  ether, phlogiston,  caloric,  crystalline  spheres,  humors,  etc.),  so  there  is  good  inductive reason to believe that the ontologies of our current scientific theories will also turn out to be false someday. Insofar as structural realism is only committed to the structural  content  of  our  best  current  scientific  theories-not  those  theories's  ontologies-it seems to escape the brunt of this objection.

most of the work in scientific structuralism to date has been focused on the issue of scientific realism. Far from being a unitary position, however, there have emerged several different competing versions of structural realism. One of the most marked divides is between what James Ladyman (1998) has called 'epistemic structural realism'  (ESR)  and  'ontic  structural  realism'  (OSR).  very  broadly,  while  the epistemic  structural  realist  argues  that  all  we  can  know  about  the  world  are  its structural relations (the objects that support these relations are forever 'hidden'), the ontological structural realist is an eliminativist about objects, arguing that all that there is to the world, at bottom, is structure (for a defense of OSR against a wide range of objections see Chapter 2 by French and Ladyman).  Each of these views can themselves be further divided according to various interpretive options (see Chapter 6 by votsis for a brief review).

In  response  to  structural  realism,  an  antirealist  position,  known  as  structural empiricism, has emerged. while the structural empiricists also emphasize the structural features of scientific theories and even recognize a considerable continuity of structure across revolutionary theory change, they deny that this structure should be interpreted realistically, as revealing the structure of the world. Instead, according to structural empiricism, what science succeeds in knowing is merely the structure of appearances, which answer only to the condition of empirical adequacy. Bas van Fraassen summarizes the structural empiricist position as follows:

Science represents the empirical phenomena solely as embeddable in certain abstract structures . . . [which] are describable only up to a structural isomorphism. There is warrant for the assertion of an accumulation of empirical knowledge through theory change precisely if it can be demonstrated for phenomena counted among the empirical successes of earlier science  that,  if  they  are  embeddable  in  the  new  models  then  they  are  'approximately' embeddable in the old models. (van Fraassen 2006, p. 305)

This position of structural empiricism has been further elaborated and defended by Otávio Bueno (see Chapter 5 of this volume).

although most of the work on scientific structuralism has been focused on the realism-antirealism debate, an increasing number of authors are adopting structuralist approaches to other key issues in the philosophy of science, such as intertheory relations  (see,  for  example,  Bokulich  2008)  and  scientific  explanation  (see,  for example, Hughes 1989 and Dorato and Felline's contribution in Chapter 9 of this volume).

The nine articles collected in this volume, written by the leading scholars in scientific structuralism, represent some of the most important directions of research in this  field.  In  the  first  chapter,  'Structural  Realism:  a  Neo-Kantian  Perspective,' michela massimi begins by tracing the historical influence of Poincaré, Cassirer, and  Russell  on  contemporary  structural  realism,  arguing  that  the  current  debate between the ontic and epistemic forms of structural realism can be traced back to the heterogeneity of these historical sources. She argues that the correct lesson to take from maxwell Newman's critique of Russell's structuralism (known as the 'Newman problem') is that structural realism should not be understood as a form of semantic realism; that is, it should not be thought of as a way of addressing referential discontinuity across theory change. Through the development of a neo-Kantian approach

to structural realism, she argues that the proper function of mathematical structure is instead to fix the epistemic conditions under which one can make justified assertions about unobservable entities. She summarizes this new view by the slogan that what the structural relations expressed in the theory's mathematical formalism cash out is truth-not reference.

In  the  second  chapter  of  the  volume,  Steven  French  and  James  Ladyman cogently defend the ontic version of structural realism (OSR) against a wide range of objections. OSR, recall, advocates a reconceptualization of physical objects in structuralist terms; that is, it rejects the existence of objects in the traditional sense. French and Ladyman draw their inspiration from Cassirer not only in adopting the ontic form of structuralism but also in following Cassirer's tying of structural realism to contemporary developments in theoretical physics.  In particular, French and Ladyman argue that the permutation invariance of elementary particles in quantum mechanics and the diffeomorphism invariance in general relativity are sympathetic with OSR in undermining the haeccitism that goes along with the traditional notion of objects. after showing how these current developments in physics lend support to the OSR position, they turn to a defense of structural realism against the following three key objections. First, the history of science shows that there can-and have been-structural losses in theory change; mathematical structure is not always preserved  simpliciter  in  the  move  from  a  predecessor  theory  to  its  successor. Second, critics have argued that OSR is incapable of making sense of 'first order' intrinsic properties, such as mass and charge, insofar as they eliminate the object in which these intrinsic properties are to inhere. and third, a number of authors have objected that OSR is unable to accommodate causality. French and Ladyman argue that there are a number of interpretative options open to the defender of OSR to respond to these three objections.

In  Chapter 3, Katherine Brading challenges French and Ladyman's view that contemporary physics supports OSR's elimination of objects. She draws an important distinction between the issue of objecthood on the one hand and whether those objects are metaphysical individuals on the other. The developments in contemporary physics that French and Ladyman point to merely restrict the available notions of objecthood-they do not force its elimination in favor of pure structure. Brading notes that there are nonetheless two additional obstacles that need to be overcome in order to develop a structural realist account of the objects of physics, and the remainder of her paper is devoted to outlining what these obstacles are, and how they might be overcome within the framework of the semantic conception of theories. The first obstacle concerns what Brading calls the problem of the 'proliferation  of  models.'  Recent  work  in  modeling  has  shown  that  a  variety  of different-incompatible-models  can  mediate  between  a  high-level  theory  (the theoretical models) and the data models. while the traditional scientific realist can countenance this proliferation of models by appealing directly to the theory's ontology, this sort of model-independent characterization of objects is not available to the structural realist. The structural realist, by contrast, is a realist about the structure of some theoretical model, claiming that it mirrors the structure of the world. Hence, a proliferation of models means that there is no longer a unique structure

linking  all  these  models  in  the  hierarchy  together  that  the  structural  realist  can appeal to as being the structure of the world. The second remaining obstacle that Brading  considers  concerns  modality.  It  has  been  argued  that  modal  realism  is essential to the kinds of explanations that realists seek to offer; in other words, what separates the scientific or structural realist from the scientific or structural empiricist is whether or not they represent the world as modal. Brading argues that the traditional structural realist view, that takes representation to be a relationship of shared structure between a particular model and a physical system, is unable to accommodate modal facts. Brading argues that a possible-even if unpalatableway of overcoming this obstacle is to take modality to be a feature of a collection of models rather than a feature of any individual model.

In Chapter 4, Christopher Pincock turns to a consideration of what role mathematics plays in the articulation and defense of epistemic structural realism (ESR). Specifically, Pincock argues that while an appeal to mathematics can succeed in making the structural realists' notion of 'structure' more precise, it ultimately leads to problems with their realism thesis. more specifically, Pincock raises the concern that the use of mathematics to derive successful empirical predictions in no way guarantees that the mathematical structure matches the structure of the world. If the mathematical structure involves either more or less structure than the structure of the phenomenon in question, then there is no assurance that this structure will be preserved  through  theory  change.  He  argues  that  even  a  partial  preservation  of structure,  expressed  for  example  by  the  equations  of  a  successor  theory  being  a limiting case of the equations of the predecessor theory, is insufficient for a defense of the realist claim. Pincock concludes by noting that this is a problem not only for the structural realist, but for any traditional form of realism that attempts to infer existence from those mathematical elements of the theory that are required for a successful prediction.

Building on many of the objections articulated in the earlier chapters, Otávio Bueno  argues  in  Chapter  5  that  we  should  reject  structural  realism  and  instead adopt the antirealist position of structural empiricism. Bueno focuses his critique of structural realism on the following four problems: first, the difficulties of defining a  metaphysically robust notion of structure needed to support the realist claims; second, a challenge to French and Ladyman's approach to incorporating quantum mechanics into OSR; third, the existence of structural losses in revolutionary theory change; and finally, a retooling of Putnam's paradox that raises a problem of nonuniqueness of structure for the structural realist. while these four problems undermine a realist approach to scientific structuralism, they pose no difficulty for an empiricist  approach.  Bueno  concludes  by  showing  how  the  structural  empiricist approach is also able to account for the 'success of science' and is able to address some of the worries (raised by Pincock in the previous chapter) regarding how one can use mathematical theories without being to committed to the existence of those mathematical objects.

In Chapter 6, Ioannis votsis takes up the challenge posed by Bueno and others, that the existence of structural losses in the history of science undermines structural  realism.  v otsis  begins  by  noting  that  the  continuity  thesis  component  of

structural  realism  is  in  need  of  a  more  precise  formulation.  He  suggests  two important modifications to the continuity claim: first, the structural realist is only committed to those structures that play an active role in the predictive and explanatory  successes  of  the  theory  (what  he  calls  'operative  structures');  and  second, those structures that are preserved need not be preserved intact-they may only be preserved as limiting cases. after appropriately restricting the continuity claim in these  ways,  votsis  turns  to  examine  concrete  examples  of  purported  structural losses in the history of science. He concludes that while the preservation of structure  is  neither  a  necessary  nor  sufficient  condition  for  (approximate)  truth,  it  is nonetheless a reliable guide.

In  Chapter  7,  martin  Thomson-Jones  explores  a  number  of  theses  regarding scientific  representation  and  what  implications  various  notions  of  representation have for different versions of structural realism. Thomson-Jones begins by distinguishing several different notions of structure-three informal and two formaland arguing that the informal notions of structure are preferable. He then goes on to distinguish two views regarding scientific representation: what he calls 'vehicle structuralism' (all scientific representation is representation by means of structure) and 'content structuralism (all scientific representation is representation of structure). He argues that the epistemic structural realists' evasion of the 'pessimistic induction' relies on the idea that theories tell us both about  the  structure  of  the world and about the nature of objects in it. This move is incompatible with content structuralism  insofar  as  content  structuralism  asserts  that  scientific  theories only represent structure. Likewise he argues that a defender of epistemic structural realism (ESR) also has good reasons for rejecting vehicle structuralism; hence, structural realism and structuralism about scientific representation are in tension with one another. moreover, Thomson-Jones concludes that insofar as the semantic view of  theories  tends  to  support  vehicle  structuralism,  there  is  good  reason  for  the epistemic structural realist to reject the semantic view of theories as well.

In Chapter 8, michael Esfeld and vincent Lam argue that there is no ontological distinction between objects and properties, but rather that this distinction is merely conceptual. From this insight, they build a new 'moderate' form of ontic structural realism (OSR), which admits the existence of physical objects instantiating structural  relations,  while  denying  that  those  objects  have  any  intrinsic  properties (including identity) over and above the relations in which they stand. (This is to be contrasted with more radical forms of OSR, such as Ladyman's, which deny the existence of objects altogether.) Harkening back to what they see as a Spinozian metaphysics, they view properties, including relations, as modes or ways in which objects exist. This new version of moderate OSR marks a break from Esfeld and Lam's earlier (2008) account, and arguably allows them to avoid some of the difficulties  that  plagued  their  previous  view.  They  conclude  by  indicating  how  this new form of moderate OSR can take objective modality into account.

In the final contribution to this volume, mauro Dorato and Laura Felline explore the connections between structural realism and scientific explanation. In particular, they  defend  a  structural  account  of  scientific  explanation  that  has  largely  been overlooked  in  the  literature.  They  argue  that  structural  explanation-rather  than

deductive-nomological  or  causal  explanation-best  characterizes  the  sort  of explanation one typically finds in quantum mechanics. They illustrate this form of explanation with two case examples: the explanation of Heisenberg's uncertainty  relations  and  the  explanation  of  quantum  non-locality.  although  they defend  the  structuralist  claim  that  structural  properties  are  explanatorily  more important than intrinsic properties, they are dubious that this can, by itself, lead one to endorse structural realism. They conclude that the explanatory primacy of structural  relations  entails  neither  that  these  structural  relations  are  all  we  can know ( pace ESR) nor that they are all that exist ( pace OSR).

## References

- Bokulich, a. (2008), Reexamining the Quantum-Classical Relation: Beyond Reductionism and Pluralism . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Cassirer,  E.  ([1923]  1953), Substance  and  Function  and  Einstein's  Theory  of  Relativity .  New York: Dover Publishing.
- Esfeld, m. and v. Lam (2008), 'moderate Structural Realism about Space-Time', Synthese 160: 27-46.
- Hughes,  R.I.g.  (1989),  'Bell's  Theorem,  ideology,  and  structural  explanation', Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory: Reflections on Bell's Theorem . Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
- Ladyman, J. (1998), 'what is structural realism?', Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 29: 409-424.
- Poincaré, H. ([1905] 1952), Science and Hypothesis . New York: Dover Publications.
- Russell, B. ([1912] 1959), The Problems of Philosophy . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Russell, B. (1927), The Analysis of Matter . New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp; Co.
- van Fraassen, B. (2006), 'Structure: Its shadow and substance', British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 57: 275-307.
- worrall, J. (1989), 'Structural realism: the best of both worlds?', Dialectica 43: 99-124.
