## Special Issue: 25 years of the Mizar Mathematical Library

FORMALIZED MATHEMATICS

Vol.

22

, No.

2

, Pages 177-178,

2014

DOI: 10.2478/forma-2014-0018

<!-- image -->

## A Note on the Seven Bridges of K¨ onigsberg Problem

Adam Naumowicz Institute of Informatics University of Białystok Sosnowa 64, 15-887 Białystok Poland

Summary. In this paper we account for the formalization of the seven bridges of K¨ onigsberg puzzle. The problem originally posed and solved by Euler in 1735 is historically notable for having laid the foundations of graph theory, cf. [7]. Our formalization utilizes a simple set-theoretical graph representation with four distinct sets for the graph's vertices and another seven sets that represent the edges (bridges). The work appends the article by Nakamura and Rudnicki [10] by introducing the classic example of a graph that does not contain an Eulerian path.

This theorem is item #54 from the 'Formalizing 100 Theorems' list maintained by Freek Wiedijk at http://www.cs.ru.nl/F.Wiedijk/100/ .

MSC: 05C45 05C62 03B35 Keywords: Eulerian paths; Eulerian cycles; K¨ onigsberg bridges problem MML identifier: GRAPH 3A , version: 8.1.03 5.23.1213

The notation and terminology used in this paper have been introduced in the following articles: [11], [2], [8], [3], [4], [9], [10], [6], [1], [13], [12], and [5].

The functors: KVertices and KEdges yielding sets are defined by terms,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively. The functors: KSource and KTarget yielding functions from KEdges into KVertices are defined by terms,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively. The functor K¨ onigsbergBridges yielding a graph is defined by the term

<!-- image -->

(Def. 5) 〈 KVertices , KEdges , KSource , KTarget 〉 .

Let us observe that K¨ onigsbergBridges is finite and connected.

Let us consider a vertex v of K¨ onigsbergBridges. Now we state the propositions:

- (1) If v = 0, then the degree of v = 3. Proof : EdgesIn v = ∅ by [3, (1)]. EdgesOut v = { 10 , 20 , 30 } by [3, (1)]. The degree of v = 3 by [10, (24)]. glyph[square]
- (2) If v = 1, then the degree of v = 3. Proof : EdgesIn v = { 10 } by [3, (1)]. EdgesOut v = { 40 , 50 } by [3, (1)]. The degree of v = 3 by [10, (24)]. glyph[square]
- (3) If v = 2, then the degree of v = 5. Proof : EdgesIn v = { 20 , 40 , 50 } by [3, (1)]. EdgesOut v = { 60 , 70 } by [3, (1)]. The degree of v = 5 by [10, (24)]. glyph[square]
- (4) If v = 3, then the degree of v = 3. Proof : EdgesIn v = { 30 , 60 , 70 } by [3, (1)]. EdgesOut v = ∅ by [3, (1)]. The degree of v = 3 by [10, (24)]. glyph[square] Now we state the propositions:
- (5) Seven Bridges of K¨ onigsberg :

There exists no path p of K¨ onigsbergBridges such that p is cyclic and Eulerian. The theorem is a consequence of (1).

- (6) There exists no path p of K¨ onigsbergBridges such that p is non cyclic and Eulerian. The theorem is a consequence of (4), (1), and (2).

## References

- [1] Grzegorz Bancerek. The ordinal numbers. Formalized Mathematics , 1( 1 ):91-96, 1990.
- [2] Grzegorz Bancerek and Krzysztof Hryniewiecki. Segments of natural numbers and finite sequences. Formalized Mathematics , 1( 1 ):107-114, 1990.
- [3] Czesław Byliński. Functions and their basic properties. Formalized Mathematics , 1( 1 ): 55-65, 1990.
- [4] Czesław Byliński. Functions from a set to a set. Formalized Mathematics , 1( 1 ):153-164, 1990.
- [5] Czesław Byliński. Some basic properties of sets. Formalized Mathematics , 1( 1 ):47-53, 1990.
- [6] Czesław Byliński and Piotr Rudnicki. The correspondence between monotonic many sorted signatures and well-founded graphs. Part I. Formalized Mathematics , 5( 4 ):577582, 1996.
- [7] Gary Chartrand. Introductory Graph Theory . New York: Dover, 1985.
- [8] Agata Darmochwał. Finite sets. Formalized Mathematics , 1( 1 ):165-167, 1990.
- [9] Krzysztof Hryniewiecki. Graphs. Formalized Mathematics , 2( 3 ):365-370, 1991.
- [10] Yatsuka Nakamura and Piotr Rudnicki. Euler circuits and paths. Formalized Mathematics , 6( 3 ):417-425, 1997.
- [11] Andrzej Trybulec. Enumerated sets. Formalized Mathematics , 1( 1 ):25-34, 1990.
- [12] Zinaida Trybulec. Properties of subsets. Formalized Mathematics , 1( 1 ):67-71, 1990.
- [13] Edmund Woronowicz. Relations and their basic properties. Formalized Mathematics , 1 ( 1 ):73-83, 1990.
