<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

ROBUST

/

CONTROL

OF

l

MULTITEPR4INAL

DC/AC

'11

V(N

SYSTENS

~by

Le-htomaki,-S.M. Chan, N.R SandellJr. ./,thans,. Laboratory for Informat/.n and  Decision Systems Massachusetts Institute of  Technology Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

<!-- image -->

. . . . . .

.

## INTRODUCTION

In the  past two  decades, dc  power transmission has provided a viable alternative to  ac  in  special applications such as  long-distance, point-to-point transmission, asynchronous connection between power systems of different frequencies, and  interconnection of  systems via  underground  and undersea cables. Common to  all these applications is the two-terminal dc link which consists of  a rectifier and  an  inverter connected by a dc transmission line. The  main  advantage of  dc  transmission lies in  its ability to  transmit a large block of  power, with  very little loss, from one  part of  the network to  another without the  inherent synchronous and  stability limitations of  ac  systems. Although most dc links to  date are built for the purpose of bulk-power transmission, it  was  discovered recently that by  modulating the dc current, a dc  link can be used as an  extremely effective control element for dauping some of  the inter-area, electromechanical osciliations in  an  integrated ac/dc system. \_The successful application of  two  terminal dc

C.E.  Grund, F. Nozari, R. Hauth tric Utility Systems Engineering Departmnt General Electric Company Schenectady, New  York. 12345

/

links suggests that even  greater flexibility in  power dispatch and  enhancement in  stability can  be  realized by a multiterminal dc (MTDC)  system embedded in  an interconnected ac grid. Several utilities are  looking into the  possibility of  building MTDC systems by adding new  terminals to  the  existing dc links or by connecting dc links that are located in  close proximity. It is quite conceivable that MTDC  will become a major part of  our energy delivery system by  the end  of this century. ----

A parallel connected MTDC system is envisaged as a network of  n (n&gt;2) inverters and  rectifiers interconnected by dc transmission lines. in  the  steady state, n-l  converters are operated under a constant-current mode, and  the nth converter with the  lowest ac commutating voltage (voltage that is  applied to  the ac side  of  a converter) is operated under constant delayangle or  constant extinction-angle mode and  determines the  voltage of  the entire MTDC system. In a transient condition the  terminals of  an  MTDC system can  potentially be  modulated in  a  coordinated manner to  damp. out the inter-area electromechanical oscillations.

The design of  the  MTDC  control system offers a unique challenge; since it  involves a large-scale, multivariable system where the sensors and  actuators are situated far apart, and  the parameters of  the  syste p are  difficult to  estimate and  may  change abruptly due to  failures such as short circuits or  generators outages. A workable design for  such a system must  be sufficiently robust to  tolerate actuator and  sensor failures, unmodelled dynamics, and  changes in syrstem parameters. Moreover, economic and  reliability considerations dictate that some form of  decentralized feedback scheme be used, if possible.

\_

\_

\_

\_

\_

\_

\_\_

* Research supported by  the U.S. Department of Energy under contract ET-78-C-01-3395

CL.2

<!-- image -->

Au

<!-- image -->

// The  intent of  this paper is  to  illustrate how  the MTDC  control problem can be analyzed from  a physical viewpoint, and  how the  physical insights can  be  utilized to  arrive at  a reasonable, robust control design. The  main emphasis is on  robustness. Some  of the  latest results in robustness theory  are  used  in the  design stage as  well as  in  analyzing the  final design. r-

Although this paper presents a general design methodology for  an MTDC system,  a hypothetical, fiveterminal dc/ac system is used as  an  example to illustrate the  steps of  the  design process. The  model of this system is described in  Section I,iand a physical interpretation of  the design model from a modal perspective is given in  Section II. Section III shows how  the  physical insights can  be  used to  construct a state penalty matrix for an LQ design, and  the  concept of  gain observability is  utilized to  study the  tradeoff  between the LQ centralized design and  other decentralized schemes. The  robustness of  the  control design is  studied in  Section IV, after a brief review of  a relevant theorem in  robustness theory. Finally, some results of  the  openand  closed-loop systems are compared in  Section V.

## I. MODELLING

The power system being studied consists of  an  nterminal MTDC  system embedded in  an ac system with m groups of  coherent machines, each  of  which is represented by the classical constant-voltage-behindtransient-reactance generator model. For  each generator the electrical angle 6 is  governed by Newton's Second Law for  a rotating mass:

<!-- image -->

## where

- J is a constant related to  the  inertia of the generator,
- m move, mover,
- P is the electrical power injected into the power network, and
- machine. D is a constant related to the damping of the

it is further assumed that the  mechanical  power  remains constant over'  the time period of  interest. The  dynamics  of the dc  converter and the dc  net- work  are ignored,  because  they are much  faster than the  electromechanical dynamics being studied. If the dc  terminals are viewed as  actuators, this implies that the control action is  equal to the  command at all  time.

.,,-

~i

S

<!-- image -->

7Wfll

,

lV,"

.

.

## 73 ADA O

(O "\_ ,] 5 -c..

-

Earigf k•

!C

Under these assumptions, a linearized model is obtained by first solving for  the steady-state solution  of  the  ac/dc  system,  and then  linearizing the equations about  the  steady-state point. The result is a lineai time-invariant model of  the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whore

AA

whhere

X 0 Al, ...At ,AsI&amp; ) Tare the changes inA 1 1'am ,i electrical angle and  frequency of  the m generators,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(The  current injection of the first dc  terminal is nbt N control variable). A and B are  matrices of aD ,ropriate dimension.

In the subsequent discussion, the "A" symbol will be dropped, and  all  quantities are  deviations from  the steady-state solution unless  otherwise specified. it is important  to  emphasize that the  design model (2) does not  take  into account  the  dynamics associated with  the  excitation system,  power-system  stabilizer, shaft torsional vibrations, and  a host  of  other physical phenomena which are significant at  frequencies greater than 30 rad/sec; thus  the  design  model  (2) is valid only  for low frequencies.  This fact will be important when designing the feedback system.

For  the purpose of  illustration, a hypothetical ar/dc  system  shown  in Figure I is used throughout. A physical interpretation of  the dynamics associated with this  system will  be  given after a brief discussion  on the  methods of modal analysis,

## II. CONTROLLABILITY, OBSERVABILITY AND PHYSICAL INTERPRETATION OF MODES

Since  the  linearized model on which the  control design is based  has limitations, as all models do,  it is important to  be able  to  physically interpret the system modes  in order  that the  control system  design may  be  evaluated in  part by how  it affects them. It fs also important to  assess beforehand  the  inherent ability of the available control inputs to  accomplish the  performance objective using only information furnished by the  available output measurements. This is done by computing the open-loop system eigenvalues the  corresponding  left and right eigenvectors, determining what each mode  physically represents and  then determining the controllability and  observability of each mode.

## Modal Analysis

To facilitate the subsequent discussion on  the physical interpretation of the system modes the role of  the left and right eigenvectors of  the system matrix A is reviewed. Consider the open-loop system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the  eigenvalues of  A, XlA 2 ,.. ,A n , are assumed 1 n to  be  distinct. Let  v and  wT be  the right and left eigenvectors respectively of  A associated with the eigenvalue Ar and define the matricis Ai

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The reason for  the adjective "right" and "left" is obvious by noting  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the right and left  eigenvsctors, the  matrices At A and  e may be  written as  dyadic expansions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  unforced response of the  system is now  given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which  shows  that  x(t)  is simply a linear Cmbination A of n tine-varying vectors, e , or mode, each weighted by the scalar w 40A physical interpretation of  a right eigenvector, Y,, can  beat be illustrated graphically on  an  Argand diagram where the components of  v are  plotted as vectors in the  complex plane. The quantity  e can be visualized a rotating all components  of Y at  the same rate Imt[i] and simultaneously shrinking or  expanding  them* the  rate expiRe it)) depending on whether X i is stable  or  unstable.  This  is similar to the phasor representation of  sinusoidal signals and is depicted in Figure  2.

The left eigenvectors, on  the  other  hand, determine a linear combination of  states that oscillate at the  complex frequency equal to  the  corresponding eigenvalue since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Physical Interpretation of  System Modes

The  open-loop eigenvalues of the  system are plotted in Figure 3. The  Argand diagram associated with each of  the four pairs of  complex elgenvalues reveals that the frequencies of  certain areas are approximately l8o0 out  of  phase with that of  the other areas. This is interpreted as  an  electromechanical in  which two  coherent groups of areas for a given mode swing against each other. For  example, in  Figure  4  for  the -.094+±j3.80 modes,  the  areas I ard 2 swing against areas 3,4 and 5 with areas 2 and 5 being dominant in the  oscillation. The  two  remaining eigenvalues are real. For the  eigenvalue at  zero the right eigenvector is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the l's correspond to  angle states and the O' to  frequency stetes. The  physical interpretation is -nrhi  r  ,rv chase reference exists for  this

.2

SN(H)

....

In other words, only the  difference in angle states is important since  any constant may  be added to all the  angle states without affecting the  dynamic re:ponse of the system.  The  left eigenvector for the remaining mode at  -.18 has the form remaining mode at -.18 has the foru

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where H, is the  intertia of  area i divided by the total system intertia. Equation (12) implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is interpreted as the  average  frequency  of  the  power system,

The  foregoing analysis, clearly demonstrates the role  of  the  left and  right eignvectors in  determining the  physical interpretation which may  not  be immediately  apparent  for  some  of  the  system  eigenvalues. The  left and right eigenvectors are  also very  useful in determining the  controllability and observability of the modes,

## oledefinitions Modal  Controllability and Observability

Consider the linear system  with  m inputs, p outputs and  n states

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the  variation of constants formula  gives

-

Att

A  t  T)H(!

e

+

<!-- image -->

e

<!-- image -->

For linear operators L(-) and H() let R (L) denote the  range of  L(-) and N(H) denote the nullspace of H(-). The  system  defined in (18) and (19) is  completely controllable if and  only if

n

R()=y(t)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- image -->

t

and  is  completely observable if  and  only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

....

......

..

..

.

3

if  the  state of the system can be driven anywhere in R by some control u(T) applied from  T-0 to  t. Analogously, (24)  implies that given  the  output X(t) and  the  input u(T) for 0&lt;T&lt;t, the initial state, and thus the state trajectory, can be determined or observed. There are different ways  of determining whether the  conditions (22) and (24) are satisfied. However, the  definitions of  controllability and  observability specified in  these conditions are qualitative coacepts and  do  not  provido quantitative measures of  how controllable or  how  observable a system  may be; they can only say  what part of  the  system is  controllable observable and what part is not. Part  of theproblem is  that it  is not  immediately apparent what is meant by terms like "strongly controllable" or "almost observable", since it  is  possible to define them  differently depending on  their intended use.

One possible way  to  quantify controllability and observability is to  measure the  change with  respect to  perturbations in the  nominal  system  model. In other  words, if "small"  perturbations in the  nominal system  change, the  controllability of  certain states, those  states would be considered "weakly controllable" or  "almost uncontrollable."

A different but  not  unrelated way of measuring the  controllability and observability is based  on the intuitive idea  of  how  strongly the  modes  can be excited by the  inputs and how  strongly the  modes  appear  at  the  outputs, respectively.  This  is made more  precise by considering the original qualitative of controllability and observability in terms of the  modes  of the  system.  Consider  L(u) and H(xo) in terms  of the  dyadic  expansion  for  exp(At):

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (26) it is clear  that if 4B8O for some  i.

then L(u) is a linear combination of  at  most n-1 eigenvectors for  any u; hence dim  R(L)&lt; n and  the sy9tem is not  completely  controllable. Similarly from (27), if Cv.0 for  some  i, then H(Cv)O but v  V01 hence dim N(H)&gt; 0  and the  system  is not  cotnpletely observable.  These facts are  immediately obvious once  y(t) is written as

<!-- image -->

if  wB 0 then the  input u cannot excite the i \_mode t and if Cv.-0 the i t h mode does not  appear  in the output y(t). In these cases the i t h mode is said  to be uncontrollable or  unobservable respectively. If the matrices B and C are  given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

th T th where bi iu the icob  n,  of B and .,  is the  it row  of C then the  matrices WD  end CV given by

0**

<!-- image -->

have a nice  interpretation: the  magnitude  of  the T n entry w of WB measures how  much the j  h input of  u affects the imode  and the  magnitude of  the entry T of CV measures how  much the jh mode apE'J th pears in  the ioutput of y(t).

If the  rows of C and the  columns of  V are  normalized  to  have unit euclidean length, the  magnitude of T S,4  represents the cosine of  the  angle between the  vec tors c and v . Thus when s and  v are  nearly orthogonal  the kmode  is  unobservable from the ioutput  for  some  small  perturbations of the  nominal system.

In  interpreting (31) and (32), it  is important to  keep in  mind  that the  magnitude of I I  I and T j1; depends  on  the  choice of units of the input

I and output as  well as  the  scaling of  the eigenvectors. If the units of the input and  output are considered fixed,the quantity 1 1 11 can only be made large  by mkn .1smlsneVW nd!yl1T 1 Tmatrix g  I Bj.

Thus  it seems reasonable to balance the left and  right but  not  very control- eigenvectors corresponding to the same eigenvalue by making their norms  equal.  This ensurs  that a mode does not  appear  very observable lable or  vice versa only because of the scaling chosen. It is  also  worth noting that the matrix products CV  and  WB  are invariant under similarity transformations of the  original system, and  the terra T T Cv w ix and  Cv w.B B  in (28) are  independent of the scaling of  the right and left eigenvectors as long  -as W=V -. For the power system model, the  matrices CV and  WB (where the left and  right eigenvectors are balanced), have the  magnitudes of their elements plotted on  bar  graphs in  Figures 5 and 6. The bars are plotted in  pairs, the one on  the left for  the observability at the indicated output and the one  on  the right for the  controllability at  the indicated input. This is  done for  each mode of  the system. In Figure 5 the  heights of  the bars in a given row have been scaled such that the  most controllable and  most -.. . , --" " '--  4,n innut  and outnut  hAve

CARNATIO

un iironi

nu

i

•

il

••

I

I.

of unit height. in  Figure 6 the  bar heights have been scaled column-wise  such that for  a given  mode  the bars  of the input and output  from which the mode is most controllable and observable have unit height. Notice  that the  arbitrary phase reference mode  is not. observable from any frequency  output but is controllable from every  current input. From  both  Figures 5 and 6 it  is  evident  that the  most observable  oscillatory modes  in  each frequency  output are also  the most controllable from the  input of the  same  area. This has important ramifications for the control system design  in that the  sensors  and actuators may be colocated, obviating the  need for  expensive -omuunication links.

## III.  LINEAR QUADRATIC REGULATOR DESIGN

The basic  design methodology adopted  here  is that of  using a linear quadratic regulator to  obtain a first iteration centralized design that moves the  open loop poles  of  the  system  to  an appropriate closed loop  pole region. This region  is determined  approximately on engineering Judgemant by how large the  closed loop bandwidth  may  be made without  allowing  uniodeled high frequency  disturbances or  dynamics to  destabilize the system.  The  centralized design  is done with  an eye towards later decentralization which uses  only the measurable  frequency  states. The  decentralized control law then  attempts to  mimic the  centralized control law by including only the  important feedback  gains  from the centralized feedback gain  matrix.

## Centralized Design

The  optimal  feedback  control law that minimizes the cost functional

<!-- image -->

is given by the familiar

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whr where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

under the  usual assumptions that 1AIQ1/21 is  detectable and [A,B1 is  stabilizable. The  state weighting Q is  selected so  that  neither the  real average frequency pole nor the arbitrary phase reference pole at zero are  moved. It  is  not  desirable to  move the pole at  zero since it is  only observable from the angle states which are  not  measurable. The  average frequency pole is  not to  be  moved since the load frequency control loop is  to  control that mode. The only modes that are  to be changed are  the  inter-area oscillatory modes since they require significant damping. There are at least two  ways that the  state weighting matrix Q may  be  selected to  do  this. The first method, a modal one, is  more general than the second method which depends on  the  physical interpretation of  the system.

## Modal Selection of Q Matrix

Consider the diagonalization of the  system (18) by defining a modal vector z(t) given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Attsatu s.La in LAUc se.UCLJ.JZn UL. W 15 LU44-. only those components of  z(t) in the cost that correspondto  poles  of  the open-loop system that are be  moved. The rest of the modes of  the mystem are made cost unobservable. Thus, if D is a diagonal matrix of  weightings for  each mode then (33)  becomes

<!-- image -->

112 Note  that  the ter2 l oz(t) can be converted into  x t)Qx(t) with a real Q matrix in  the following way. Define I  as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There is  a slight 14ficulty with this method, however, in  that EA,Q may  not  be detectable. This is  the case because the  arbitrary phase referen mode at  zero is made cost unobservable. One  way around this problem is to  use  a reduced model that does not  have this mode. An  alternative way is to * artificially stabilize the cost unobservable unstable modes leaving the  other system modes fixed. This new  system is  essentially the  same as  the  old  system for the purposes of  design of  a feedback controller since the  controller will  not attempt to  stabilize the  unstable cost unobservable modes. This is accomplished utilizing the dyadic expansion of  the  A

matrix in (9). Let A be  the artificially stabilized system matrix which is defined by

<!-- image -->

where

<!-- image -->

Now  the matrix A has the same eigenvectors as A and the same eigenvalues as A except for  those associated with the index set 1). This ensures that the old  and  new  system will behave the similarly from  the standpoint of  controller design. A somewhat simpler variation of this approach, which works if C is sufficiently small, is  to  define A as  A=A-6I. Then A has the same eigenvectors as A  and  eigenvalues E away from those of  A.

## Average Frequency Deviation Selection of Q Matrix

The second method of  selecting the state weighting matrix Q is  to  weight only each machine's or  area's frequency deviation from the average frequency. Thus the state weighting is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

.

...

,

ori.

..

-

average frequency deviation weighting for  the il area. This Q only weights frequency variables so that the zero pole  will not be moved and  since only deviations from the average frequency are weighted the average frequency is used as a reference and hence the pole at -. 18 will not be  moved. Using this method also requires the  stabilization of  the zero phase reference mode. Therefore in  the centralized design, ei  is  subtracted from the  system A matrix and is used as the  system matrix when solving the  Riccati equation (35); the  resulting feedback control, however, is applied to  the  original unstabilized system. Both methods of  selecting Q require only a few iterations of  selecting modal weightings or  frequency deviation weightings to  obtain the approximate damping of  the modes required. It  is  .interesting that both methods give  approximately the  same feedback gains. The centralized design that is  used  throughout the remainder of  the  paper is  based on the weighting of  deviations from  average frequency. It  should also be  mentioned that the  control weighting matrix R was selected as  the  identity matrix multiplied by a scalar to  tradeoff state and  control energy. the average frequency is used as a reference and

## Feedback Structures

In  order to  describe several controllers that result from modifications of  the  centralized controller it  is necessary to  classify several different feedback structures. They are  the followingfo

- (1) WQ Centralized -full state feedback
- (2) LQ Full State without Angles -frequency feedback only
- (3) LQ Major -local area frequency and frequency of  area 1 available for  feedback (the  major centralized gains)
- (4) LQ Decentralized -only local areafrequency available for  feedback.

In  each case the  feedback gain for  the  controller structure is  obtained by simply setting the gains in the  centralized gain  matrix, that correspond to states not  available for feedback, to  zero. The  closed-loop eigenvalues for cases 1,3 and 4  are  given in Figure 7. To  assess how closely each of  the  feedback controllers mimic the  centralized feedback controller the  concept of  gain  observability is  introduced.

## Gain observability

The  ability to  realize a centralized feedback law in  a  decentralized manner depends critically on the nature of  the  centralized feedback law. It  may not  even be  possible if  the  centralized feedback law depends substantially on states not available for feedback. Thus only modes observable from the frequency outputs are  moved in  the  centralized design. Eliminating gains in  the centralized gain matrix that do  not significantly affect the  feedback is  commonly done by setting the "small" gains to  zero. What is considered "small" must be  considered in  reference to the expected size of  the  variations in  the state. However, it  is  not always clear what the  expected variations are since,  in  general,  some of  the state variables may  not  be  physical quantities. Also, while a particular gain may not by itself be  insignificant, a group of  certain gains may collectively have very little effect on  the feedback control signal implemented since cancellation of  the  contributions of different gain-state products may  occur when summed. This later idea is  made precise by the  notion of  gain observability. Gain observability merely determines

h

9- the  modes being fedback in  each control channel by using the gain matrix  as  an output measurement matrix and  computing the  matrix GV where G is the gain  matrix and V, given by (4), is the  matrix of  right eigenvectors. By computing GV for  different gain  matrices G, the modes being fedback in  each channel may  be  compared. This is done in  Figure 8 for che four feedback structures previously described. From  Figure 8 it  is apparent that the LQ Centralized and LQ Full State without Angle feedback cases are  practically identical indicating it  is not  important to  try and measure the angle states. The LQ Major case is also quite similar to  the LQ Centralized case while the LQ Decentralized case is somewhat less so. Thus gain observability indicates the dominant modes in each feedback channel and  provides insight on  how  to  construct a decentralized or  limited state feedback controller that approximates a centralized controller.

As a matter of  practical importance, each control isignal in  the  real system is passed through a washout which washes out  any constant frequency errors that may  be  generated. The  washouts have a transfer function -and  are included  in the subsequent s 2 analysis as  part of  the  controllers,

## \. I. 0frequency

in any  control system design there is  a degree of uncertainty abouv\  the model  parameters  and  about the nature of  the disturbances that act  as  exogenous inputs to  the  model. A well  designed control system must be  able to  tolerate such uncertainty without destabilizing the  system. Classically, a measure of robustness has  been the  notions of  gain and  phase margin for SISO feedback systems. In  the  multivariable  version of the Nyquist stability theorem, the gain and  phase margins do  not  provide an  adequate measure of  the robustness of  the nominal feedback systern since arbitrarily small simultaneous perturbations in the nominal systemmay cause  instability of the closed-loop  system  even  though  there  are  good  gain  and phase margins in  each feedback channel.

The  multivariable Nyquist criterion counts the encirclements of  the origin by the  det(I+G(jw)) where G(s) is the loop  transfer functions. In  order to Change the  number of encirclements of  the  origin, det(I+G(jw)) must be  zero for some w. Thus for nominally stable closed-loop systems the  det(I+G) tries to  measure the "distance" of I+G to  the  critical point but  is not  a good  measure because det(I+G) may  be very sensitive to  small changes in G. In the scalar case  det(I+G) becomes lg and  small changes in g yield only small changes in  the  Ntquist diagram  of l+g or  g so  that this  problem does not arise. Therefore, in  the  multivariable setting what is required is an  insensitive measure of the "distance" of  I+G  to the  origin. The minimum singular value of leg is such a measure. It  measuresthe minimum size of  the additive perturbation, AG, required to  make det(I+G+AG)=0 or I+G+LG exactly singular. The  minimum  and maximum singular values are denoted as 0 and  O respectively and are  defined by very sensitive to small changes in G.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

nominal system that will  make the  closed-loop system unstable. It  has been known for some time  that linear quadratic  regulators  for  single  input-single output systems have inherently good guaranteed gain and phase margins, of  namely infinite upward and 50% reduction gain margins and +60* phase margin Ell. This is because  for LQ regulators Il+g(jw) j&gt;l VW so that  the Nyquist  diagram  of  g must  avoid  the unit disk  centered at (-1.0). This is  shown in  Figure 9. For  multivtidable systems, ralman's well-known inequality for LQ regulators (3,41 generalizes with R-i to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  analogous to  the scalar case where ll+g(jw))a 1&gt;. It  has  more recently been shown E21 that for  diagonal R&gt;O and Q&gt;O that the  multivariable LQ  regulators have the  same gain and  phase margins in  each feedback channel simultaneously as in  the single input-single output case. However, as  is well known, the infinite gain  margin is not  a reality for  the  real world because the  nominal model is  only  valid within a limited range and  furthermore a constant feedback gain  at  all frequencies is  not  realizable. Thus the bandwidth of  the  closed loop  system must still be checked to  ensure that the  bandwidth is  net  excessive and  that the loop is  rolled off  sufficiently where unmodelled dynamics might affect the  closed loop stability of  the  system. The following robustness theorem checks this in  a more formal way.

## Robustness Theorem 15,6]:

Let  G(s) be  the  transfer function matrix of  a proper finite dimensional linear system. Let G(s) be its nominal (design) value, also  proper and let AG (s) and  &amp;G  (s), defined by the  relations, A M

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  such that G(s) and  G(s) have the  same number of open-loop poles in the closed right half plane. if the nominal feedback system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is stable, then the  perturbed system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is stable for all  perturbations satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Alternatively, the  conditions (53) and (54)  may be replaced by (55) and (56) respectively given as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore if  at some frequency w., \_(I+G(jw)) is small, there exists a small perturbation in  the

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- image -->

"

Computationally, I1"11,or I. are cheaper and o) aquency. esierut cpuesthan in  pandof thsre sedula i hes subsequent  discussion in  place  of the singular values7.

To  test the  robustness of the  modified LQ controller for the  multiterminal dc system, several plots of  the  norms specified in  conditions (55) and (56) have been computed with respect to  different perturbed models. The nominal model consists of  the open-loop system regulated by the LQ major controller modified, as  previously described, by passing the control inputs through washouts with transfer function to  eliminate response  to  constant frequency s+.2 errors. The perturbed model is the  same as the nominal except that it includes additional filtering of the  control inputs by an  approximately unity gain double pole filter at s=25 to  simulate the additional phase lag  of  torsional filters in  the real  system. The plot for  the multiplicative perturbation, Figure 11,plowto theut ie perturbedsystemisstabeationd Figue , shcsthat the  perturbed system  is  stable and that the nominal system has a degree of  robustness even beyond the  perturbation. It is  interesting to  note that  the additive perturbation, Figure 10, for  the same  perturbed model exceeds the  rominal at  the  system resonances. This points out the fact that the conditions (55) and (56) are  only sufficient but not necessary. Here in lies one of  the major weaknesses of  the singular value approach; it  is  sometimes unnecessarily conservative. In  Figures 12 and 13  the LQ  Major controller is checked for robustness with respect to  a  perturbed system that includes a. additional machine, with relatively small inertia, that is  weakly coupled to  the rest of  the system to  model intra-area dynamics. The resulting changes in  the closed-loop system eigenvalues are insignificant even though the  sufficient conditions indicate there does exist a perturbation of  the same size as the additional intra-area dynamics that  will  destabilize the ais t system. Notice a in the  Figures 10 and 11 that "J(I+G)-lJfl and "fl(I+G-1)-lJl-i do  not  become small

at  any  frequency which is indicative of  robustness.

To  make the connection with the classical SISO gain and  phase margins, under the LQ  major controller w  ith washouts,  one of the system feedback  loops is broken. The  margins for this channel are  an  infinite upward gain margin, a gain reduction margin of  100% and  a phase margin of +100 degrees. This also gives an  indication of  how conservative the  norm plots may be, since they take into account perturbations in  the system that may  not  be reasonable. Other robustness norm-plots for  the completely centralized decentralized case are similar in  nature. The centralized 1 1weighting case has the largest JI(I+G) II , as expected, and the decentralized the  smallest,

Another method of evaluating the  design is  to break feedback loops simulating actuator or sensor failure or  manual intervention and check the stability of the resulting system. If  the system remains stable under the breaking of feedback loops the integrity of the system is  said to  be maintained. Even  though a system is  open-loop stable, this does not  guarantee the the closed-loop will remain stable when feedback loops are broken. Thus it  is important to  check the integrity of the closed-loop system. For the LQ major feedback law  with  washouts added, the system integrity is  maintained for  all possible combinations of  broken feedback loops. The same is true for the completely decentralized feedback law  with washouts also.

Finally, a  comparison between the open-and closedloop  bandwidths is made. In  Figure 14 I G(j)JIJ, the maximum open-loop frequency response, and

II(I+G-cjw))-1, the

um closed-loop response, are  plotted against freThis shows that the  control law just damps out the  resonances in  the open-loop system without affecting the  rest of  frequency response. Control energy is not  wasted i s modifying the  open-loop  system more than necessary. This is  related to the perfor-

## V. CONTROL SYSTEM PERFORMANCE

Evaluation of  the closed-loop system performance is  done by  examining the system transient responses and  feedback control inputs to  the system generated by an  initial condition corresponding to  the state vector for the  open-loop system after the clearing of a three-phase ground fault at  area 4. Figure 15 shows the angle of  area 4 using area 3 as a reference (i.e. 64-63) for  the open-loop, the  LQ  centralized, 4 3

LQ major and LQ decentralized designs  with the washouts in  place. Figure 16 shows the corresponding frequency  w for  the  same  initial condition and con4 trollers.

As can be  seen from these figures, all the controllers giveapproximately the same performance in the transient responses. They significantly reduce the  settling time  of  the  inter-area oscillations. These responses are  typical of  all the angle and frequency transient responses. However, the control inputs for  the various controllers are distinguishable. Figure 17  displays the control signal u 2 for the  three different controllers, again with the  washouts in place. As can be  seen, the centralized feedback gain plae as cntrolsene inting acrdin uses the least control energy indicating a  coordinated control effort. The  decentralized controller, as expected, use the  most since it  lacks information to yield a  coordinated effort. The effect of  the communication of  the  frequency of area one to  all  other areas can be  assessed in  terms of  the difference in the control energy for the LQ  major and  LQ  decentralized cases.

## VI. S

In  this paper some of  the fundamental concepts of  linear system theory are exploited to  gain a better understanding of the  internal dynamics of the  system and  how  it is related to  the external environment. It  is shown how the right and  left eigenvectors help physically interpret the response of  the system at different outputs when  excited from  different inputs making use of  the concepts of  modal controllability and observability. A method for selecting the state matrix to  relocate only specified modes is given. The concept of  gain observability is utilized in  comparing different feedback structures, with limited state feedback, with the centralized full state feedback controller. It  is seen through simulation that the cost of  a decentralized feedback structure is  that more control energy is required to damp out  oscillations due to  the loss of  communication of  important information. The  controllers are shown to  be  robust with respect to  model uncertainty by  use of  multivariable and  classical robustness measures. The  integrity of  the system is also maintained in  the face of  all possible actuator or sensor failures. These considerations, that the practicing control engineer must take into account in the design of  a practical control system, are illustrated in  this design and its evaluation. It is important to  emphasize that the multiterminal dc  controller design is based on  a  linearized model and does not  consider large signal, nonlinear phenomena such as  converter mode switching. These are topics for future research.

<!-- image -->

## REFERENCESR[Xt

- 11  Anderson, B.D.0. and  Moore, 3.B., Linear Optimal Control, Prentice-Hall, 1971. (1]
- [2) Safonov, M.G., and M4.  Athans, "Gain and Phase Margin~s  for  Multiloop LQG Regulators," IEEE  Trans. Auto. Control ' Vol. AC-22, pp. 173-179, April 1977.
- [31 Kalman,  R.E., "When is a Linear System Optimal," J3. Basic Eng., Trans. ASI4E,  Ser, D. Vol. 86, pp. 5160, 1964.
- [4) Anderson, B.0.0., "The  Inverse Problem of  Optimal  Control," Fourth  Annual Allerton Conference on  Circuit and System Theory, Urbana, Ill., Oct. 1966.
- (51 Doyle, J.C., "Robustness of IMultiloop Linear Feedback Systems,"  IEEE  Conf. on Dec.  and Control,  San Diego, C., Jan. 1979.
- [6) Sandell, Jr., N.R., "Robust Stability of Linear  Dynamic System  with Application to Singular  Perturbation Theory,"  Laboratory  for information and Decision  System , MIT,  Report ESL-P-837, August 1978.
- (71 Laub, A.J., "Robust Stability of Linear  SystemsSome  Computational  Considerations," Laboratory for  information and Decision  Systems, MIT, Report LIDS-R-904,  Feb. 1979.

r

<!-- image -->

Figure 1: A power  System with 5 DC Terminals  and 5  AC Miodes,  each representing an Area or Group  of Coherent  Generators.

th Figure  2: Argand Diagram for  iMode.

<!-- image -->

Figure 3: Open-Loop  Eigenvalues with Nonnegative Imaginary  Parts.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure  4:  Argand Diagrams of  Oscillatory Modes.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Modal Observability and  Controllability of  Different Modes from  a Specified Input or  Output.

<!-- image -->

"U1)SZ

Figure 6: Modal Observability and  Controllability of  a Specified Mode from Different Inputs or  Outputs.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7: Closed-Loop Eigenvaluea for  Different Controllers.

-Ci

'

AL

9

Ug

Figure 8: Gain Observability for  Different controllers.

<!-- image -->

g

Figure 9: Disk that Nyquist  Diagrami  fc-. SISO LQ Regulator  must avoid,

<!-- image -->

-. 18/3L

1III

10: Robustness for  Additive  Perturbation ofAdditional Torsional Filters.

<!-- image -->

Figure 11: Robustness  for  Multiplicative Perturbation of Additional Torsional Filters.

<!-- image -->

Fles

Figure  12:  Robustness  for  Additive  Perturbation of Additional  Intra-Area Dynamics.

<!-- image -->

1

<!-- image -->

.(RAO/SEC)

Figure 13: Robustness for  MultipliCative Perturbation of Additional Intra-Area DynamicS.

<!-- image -->

Fiue14: MxmmOpen-Loop/Closed-Loop Multivariable Frequency Response.

Figure 15: Comnparison of (6 -4 3 Response for Different Controllers.

<!-- image -->

11ol

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure\_ 17(omaionoEC2ipu) o Dfferet

<!-- image -->
