## The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis

A. M. Turing

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences , Vol. 237, No. 641. (Aug. 14, 1952), pp. 37-72.

## Stable URL:

http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0080-4622%2819520814%29237%3A641%3C37%3ATCBOM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences is currently published by The Royal Society.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html . JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use cont the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at http://www.jstor.org/journals/rsl.html .

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or print page of such transmission.

JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journa more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

<!-- image -->

## THE  CHEMICAL  BASIS  OF  MOKPHOGENESIS

BY A.  M.  TURING, F.R.S. University qf Manchester

(Received 9  November  195  1-Revised 15 March  1952)

It  is  suggested  that  a  system  of  chemical  substances, called  morphogens,  reacting  together  and diffusing  through  a  tissue,  is  adequate to  account  for  the  main  phenomena  of  morphogenesis. Such  a  system,  although it may  originally  be  quite  homogeneous,  may  later  develop  a  pattern or  structure  due  to  an  instability  of  the  homogeneous  equilibrium,  which  is  triggered  off  by random disturbances.  Such reaction-diffusion  systems are considered  in  some detail  in  the  case of  an  isolated  ring  of  cells,  a  mathematically  convenient,  though  biolo:~irall,  unusual  system. The investigation  is  chiefly concerned with  the onset of instability.  It is  faund that there are six essentially  different  forms which  this  may  take. In the  most  interesting  form  stationary waves appear on the ring.  It is  suggested that this might account, for instance, for the tentacle patterns on Hydra and  for  whorled  leaves.  A  system  of  reactions  and  diffusion  on  a  sphere  is  also  considered. Such  a  system  appears  to  account  for  gastrulation.  Another  reaction  system  in  two dimensions  gives  rise  to  patterns  reminiscent  of  dappling. It  is  also  suggested  that  stationary waves in  two  dimensions could account for the phenomena of phyllotaxis.

The purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  discuss a  possible mechanism  by  which  the genes  of  a  zygote may determine the anatomical structure of the resulting organism. The theory does not make any new hypotheses; it merely suggests that certain well-known physical laws are sufficient to account for many of the facts. The full understanding of  the paper  requires  a good knowledge of mathematics,  some biology,  and  some elementary  chemistry. Since readers  cannot  be  expected to  be experts in all of these subjects, a number of elementary facts are explained, which can be found in text-books, but whose omission would make the paper difficult reading.

## 1. A MODEL OF THE EMBRYO. MORPHOGENS

I n   this section a mathematical model of the growing embryo will be described. This model will be a  simplification  and an idealization,  and consequently a  falsification.  It is  to be hoped  that  the  features retained  for  discussion  are those  of  greatest  importance  in  the present state of knowledge.

The model takes two slightly different forms.  In one of them the cell theory is recognized but the cells are idealized into geometrical points.  In the other the matter of the organism is  imagined as continuously distributed. The cells are not,  however,  completely ignored, for  various  physical  and  physico-chemical  characteristics  of  the  matter  as  a  whole  are assumed to have values appropriate to the cellular matter.

With either of the models one proceeds as with a physical theory and defines an entity called 'the  state of the system'. One then describes how that state is to be determined from the state at a moment very shortly before.  With either model the description of the state consists of two parts,  the mechanical and the chemical. The mechanical part of the state describes the positions, masses, velocities and elastic properties of the cells, and the forces between them.  In the continuous form of  the theory  essentially  the same information  is given in the form of the stress, velocity,  density and elasticity of the matter. The chemical part of the state is given  (in the cell form of theory) as the chemical composition  of each separate cell; the diffusibility  of each substance between each two adjacent cells rnust also

be given.  In the  continuous form  of  the theory  the concentrations  and diffusibilities  of each substance have to be given at each point.  In determining the changes of state one should take into account

- (i)  The changes of position and velocity as given by Newton's laws of motion.
- (ii)  The stresses as given by  the elasticities  and motions,  also taking into account the osmotic pressures as given from the chemical data.
- (iii)  The chemical reactions.
- (iv)  The diffusion  of  the  chemical  substances.  The region  in  which  this  diffusion  is possible is given from the mechanical data.

This  account  of  the  problem  omits  many  features, e.g. electrical  properties  and  the internal structure of the cell.  But even so it is a problem of formidable mathematical complexity.  One cannot at present hope to make any progress with the understanding of such systems except in very simplified cases. The  interdependence of the chemical and mechanical data adds enormously to the difficulty, and attention will therefore be confined, so far as is possible, to cases where these can be separated. The mathematics of elastic solids is a welldeveloped subject,  and has  often  been  applied  to  biological  systems.  In this  paper  it is proposed to give attention rather to cases where the mechanical aspect can be ignored and the chemical  aspect is  the most  significant.  These cases promise  greater  interest, for  the characteristic action of the genes themselves is presumably chemical. The systems actually to be considered  consist therefore of masses of tissues which  are not growing, but within which certain substances are reacting chemically,  and through which they  are diffusing. These substances will be called morphogens, the word being intended to convey the idea of a form producer.  It is not intended to have any very exact meaning,  but is simply the kind of substance concerned in this theory. The evocators of Waddington provide a good example of morphogens (Waddington 1940). These  evocators diffusing into  a tissue  somehow persuade it to develop along different lines from those which would have been followed in its  absence.  The genes  themselves  may  also  be  considered  to  be  morphogens.  But  they certainly form rather a special class. They are quite indiffusible.  Moreover, it is only by courtesy  that  genes can be  regarded  as  separate molecules. I t  would  be  more  accurate (at  any rate at mitosis) to regard them as radicals of the giant molecules known as chromosomes.  But presumably  these radicals act almost independently, so that it is unlikely that serious errors will arise through regarding the genes as molecules.  Hormones may also be regarded as quite typical morphogens.  Skin pigments may be regarded as morphogens if desired.  But those whose action is to be considered here do not come squarely within any of these categories.

The function of genes is presumed to be purely catalytic. They catalyze the production of other morphogens, which in turn  may only be catalysts.  Eventually, presumably,  the chain leads to some morphogens  whose  duties are not  purely  catalytic.  For instance,  a substance might break down into a number of smaller molecules,  thereby increasing the osmotic pressure in a cell and promoting its growth. The genes might thus be said to influence the anatomical form of the organism by  determining the rates of those reactions which they catalyze.  If the rates are assumed to be those determined by the genes, and if a comparison of organisms is not in question, the genes themselves may be eliminated from the discussion.  Likewise any other catalysts obtained secondarily through  the agency of

the genes may equally be ignored, if there is no question of their concentrations varying. There may, however, be some other morphogens, of the nature of evocators, which cannot be altogether forgotten, but whose role may nevertheless be subsidiary, from the point  of view of the formation of a particular  organ.  Suppose, for instance, that a  'leg-evocator' morphogen were being produced in a certain region of an embryo, or perhaps diffusing into it, and that an attempt was being made to explain the mechanism by which the leg was formed in the presence of the evocator.  It would then be reasonable to take the distribution of the evocator in space and time as given in advance and to consider the chemical reactions set in train by it. That at any rate is the procedure adopted in the few examples considered here.

## 2. MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND REQUIRED

The greater  part  of  this  present  paper  requires  only  a  very  moderate  knowledge  of mathematics. What is chiefly required is an understanding of the solution of linear differential equations with constant coefficients.  (This  is also what is chiefly required for an understanding of mechanical and electrical oscillations.)  The solution of such an equation takes the form of a sum CA ebt,  where the quantities A,  b may be complex, i.e. of the form a + i/ ? , where a and /? are ordinary (real) numbers and i =  , , -1. I t   is of great importance that the physical significance of the various  possible solutions of this  kind  should  be  appreciated, for instance, that

- (a)  Since the solutions will normally be real one can also write them in the form BCA ebt or C%A ebt (9 means 'real part of').
- (6)   That if A = A' eiP and b = a + iP,  where A', a, / I , Q, are real, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus each such term represents  a  sinusoidal oscillation if a = 0,  a  damped oscillation if a &lt; 0, and an oscillation of ever-increasing amplitude if a &gt; 0.

- ( c ) If any one of the numbers b has a positive real part the system in question is unstable.
- (d)  After  a  sufficiently great lapse of time all the terms Aebt  will be negligible: in comparison with those for which b has the greatest real part, but unless this greatest real part is itself zero these dominant terms will eventually either tend to zero or to infinite values.
- ( e ) That the indefinite growth mentioned in (6) and (d)  will in any physical or biological situation eventually be arrested due to a breakdown  of the assurr~ptions under which the solution was valid. Thus, for example, the growth of a colony of bacteria will normally be taken to satisfy the equation dyldt = ay (a&gt; 0), y being the number of organisms at time t, and this has the solution y = A eat.  When, however, the factor eat  has reached some billions the food supply can no longer be regarded as unlimited  and the equation dyldt = ay will no longer apply.

The following relatively elementary result will be needed, but may not be known to all readers :

but

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first case can easily be proved when it is noticed that the left-hand side is a geometric progression.  In the second case all the terms are equal to 1.

The relative  degrees  of  difficulty  of the various  sections  are believed  to  be  as follows. Those who are unable to follow the points made in this section should only attempt $$3, 4, 11,154 14  and part ofS13. Those who can  just understand this section should profit also from @7, 8, 9. The remainder, @5, 10, 13, will probably only be understood by those definitely trained as mathematicians.

## 3.  CHEMICAL REACTIONS

I t  has been explained in a preceding section that the system to be considered consists of a number of chemical substances (morphogens) diffusing through a mass of tissue of given geometrical form and reacting together within it. What laws are to control the development of this situation ? They are quite simple. The diffusion follows the ordinary laws of diffusion, i.e.  each  morphogen  moves from regions  of greater to regions  of less  concentration, at a rate proportional to the gradient of the concentration, and also proportional to the 'diffusibility' of the substance. This is very like the conduction of heat, diffusibility taking the place of conductivity.  If it were not for the walls of the cells the diffusibilities would  be inversely proportional to the square roots  of the molecular weights.  The pores  of the cell walls put a further handicap on the movement of the larger molecules in addition to that imposed by their inertia, and most of them are not able to pass through the walls at all.

The reaction rates will be assumed to obey the 'law of mass action'. This states that the rate at which a reaction  takes place is proportional to the concentrations of the reacting substances. Thus,  for  instance,  the  rate  at  which  silver  chloride  will  be  formed  and precipitated  from a solution of silver nitrate and sodium chloride by the reaction

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

will  be  proportional  to  the  product  of  the  concentrations  of  the silver  ion Ag+ and the chloride ion C1-. I t  should be noticed  that the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is not used because it does not correspond to an actual reaction but to the final outcome of a number of reactions. The law of mass action must only be applied to the actual reactions. Very often certain substances appear in the individual reactions of a group, but not in the final  outcome.  For instance, a reaction A  t B may really take the form of two steps A+ G-t C and C-t B + G.  I n  such a case the substance G is described as a catalyst, and as catalyzing the reaction  A t B .   (Catalysis  according  to  this  plan  has  been  considered  in  detail  by Michaelis &amp; Menten (1913) .) The effect  of the genes is presumably achieved almost entirely by catalysis. They are certainly not permanently used up in the reactions.

Sometimes one can regard the effect of a catalyst as merely altering a reaction rate.  Consider, for example, the case mentioned above, but suppose also that A can become detached from G, i.e. that the reaction C-t A+ G  is taken into account. Also suppose that the reactions A+ G s C both  proceed  much faster than C-t B + G.  Then the concentrations of A,  G,  C will be related  by the condition that there is equilibrium between the reactions A+ G t C and  C+A+G, so  that  (denoting concentrations  by  square  brackets)  [A] [G] -k[C] for some constant k. The reaction C-t B-t G will of course proceed at a rate proportional to [C], i.e. to  [A] [GI.  If the amount of C is always small compared with the amount of G one can say that the presence of the catalyst and its amount merely alter the mass action constant

for the reaction A+ B, for the whole proceeds at a rate proportional to [A]. This situation does not, however, hold invariably.  It may well happen that nearly all of G takes the combined forrn Cso long as any  of A is left. In  this case the reaction proceeds at  a rate  independent of the concentration of A  until A  is entirely consumed.  In either of these cases the rate of the complete group ofreactions depends only on the concentrations of the reagents, although usually not according to the law of mass action applied crudely to the chemical equation for the whole group. The same applies in any case where all reactions of the group with one exception proceed at speeds much greater than that of the exceptional one.  In these cases the rate of the reaction is a function of the concentrations of the reagents.  More generally again, no such approximation is applicable. One simply has to take all the actual reactions into account.

According to  the cell  model  then,  the number and positions  of  the cells are given  in advance, and so are the rates at which the various morphogens diffuse between  the cells. Suppose that there are N cells and M morphogens. The state of the whole system is then given by MNnumbers, the quantities of the Mmorphogens in each of Ncells. These numbers change with time, partly because of the reactions, partly because of the diffusion.  To determine the part of the rate of change of one of these numbers due to diffusion, at any one moment, one only needs to know the amounts of the same morphogen in the cell and its neighbours,  and the diffusion  coefficient for that morphogen. To find the rate of change due to chemical reaction  one only needs to know the concentrations of all morphogens at that moment in the one cell concerned.

This description of the system in terms  of  the concentrations in the various  cells is,  of course,  only  an approximation.  It would  be justified  if,  for  instance,  the contents  were perfectly  stirred.  Alternatively,  it  may  often  be justified  on  the  understanding  that  the 'concentration in the cell' is the concentration at a certain representative point, although the idea of 'concentration  at a point'  clearly itself raises difficulties. The author believes that the approximation is  a  good  one, whatever  argument is  used  to justify  it,  and it is certainly a convenient one.

I t  would  be possible to extend much of the theory to the case of organisms imrnersed in a fluid, considering the diffusion within the fluid as well as from cell to cell.  Such problems are not, however, considered here.

## 4. THE BREAKDOWN OF SYMMETRY AND HOMOGENEITY

There appears superficially to be a difficulty confronting this theory of morphogenesis, or,  indeed,  almost  any other  theory  of it.  An  embryo in its  spherical blastula  stage has spherical symmetry, or if there are any deviations from perfect symmetry, they cannot be regarded as of any particular importance, for the deviations vary greatly from embryo to embryo within  a  species, though  the organisms  developed  from  them  are barely  distinguishable.  One may take it therefore that there is perfect spherical symmetry. But a system which has spherical symmetry, and whose state is changing because of chemical reactions and diffusion, will remain spherically symmetrical for ever.  (The same would hold true if the state were changing according to the laws of electricity and magnetism, or of quantum mechanics.)  It certainly cannot result in an organism such as a horse, which is not spherically symmetrical.

There is a fallacy in this  argument.  I t  was assumed that the deviations from spherical symmetry in the blastula could be ignored because it makes no particular difference what form of asymmetry there is.  It is, however, important  that there are some  deviations,  for the system may reach a state of instability in which these irregularities, or certain components of them, tend to grow.  If this happens a new and stable equilibrium is usually reached, with the symmetry  entirely gone.  The variety  of  such  new equilibria will normally  not be so great as the variety  of irregularities giving rise to  them.  In the case, for instance,  of the gastrulating sphere, discussed at  the end ofthis paper, the direction of the axis of the gastrula can vary, but nothing else.

The situation is very similar to that which arises in connexion with electrical oscillators. I t   is  usually easy to understand how an oscillator keeps going when once it has started, but on a first acquaintance it is not obvious how the oscillation begins. The explanation is that there  are  random  disturbances  always  present  in  the  circuit.  Any  disturbance  whose frequency is the natural frequency of the oscillator will tend to set it going. The ultimate fate of the system will be a state of oscillation at its appropriate frequency, and with an amplitude (and a wave form) which are also determined by the circuit. The phase of the oscillation alone is determined by the disturbance.

If chemical reactions and diffusion are the only forms of physical change which are taken into account the argument above can take a slightly different form. For if the system originally has no sort of geometrical symmetry but is a perfectly homogeneous and possibly irregularly shaped  mass  of tissue, it will continue indefinitely  to be homogeneous.  In practice, however, the presence of irregularities, including statistical fluctuations in the numbers of molecules undergoing the various reactions,  will, if the system has an appropriate kind of instability, result in this homogeneity disappearing.

This breakdown of symmetry or homogeneity may be illustrated by the case of a pair of cells originally  having the same, or very  nearly  the same,  contents. The system is homogeneous: it is  also symmetrical  with  respect  to  the operation  of  interchanging  the cells. The contents of  either  cell will  be  supposed  describable by  giving  the concentrations  X and Y of two morphogens. The chemical reactions will be supposed such that, on balance, the first morphogen (X)  is produced at the rate 5X-  BY+  1 and the second (Y) at the rate 6X-  7Y+ 1.  When, however,  the strict  application of  these  formulae  would  involve  the concentration of a morphogen in a cell becoming negative, it is understood that it is instead destroyed only at the rate at which it is reaching that cell by diffusion. The first morphogen will be supposed to duffuse at the rate 0.5 for unit difference of concentration between the cells, the second, for the same difference, at the rate 4.5. Now if both morphogens have unit concentration in  both  cells  there  is  equilibrium. There is  no resultant  passage  of  either morphogen across the cell walls, since there is no concentration difference, and there is no resultant production  (or destruction) of  either morphogen in either cell since 5X-  6Y+ 1 and 6X-7Y+ 1 both  have the value zero for  X -1, Y = 1. But  suppose the values are X, = 1-06, Y, = 1.02 for the first cell and X, = 0.94, Y, = 0.98 for the second. Then the two morphogens will be being produced  by chemical action at the rates 0.18, 0.22 respectively in the first cell and destroyed at the same rates in the second. At the same time there is a Aow due to diffusion from the first cell to the second at the rate 0.06 for the first morphogen and 0.18 for the second.  In sum the effect is a flow from the second cell to the first at the

rates  0.12, 0.04 for  the  two  morphogens respectively. This  flow  tends  to  accentuate  the already existing differences between the two cells.  More generally, if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

at some moment the four concentrations continue afterwards to be expressible in this form, and 5 increases at the rate 25. Thus there is an exponential drift away from the equilibrium condition. It will be appreciated that a drift away from the equilibrium occurs with almost any small displacement from the equilibrium condition, though  not  normally  according to  an exact exponential  curve. A  particular  choice was  made in  the  above argument in order to exhibit the drift with only very simple mathematics.

Before it can be said to follow that a two-cell system can be unstable, with inhorr~ogeneity succeeding homogeneity, it is necessary to show that the reaction rate functions postulated really  can  occur. To specify  actual substances, concentrations and  temperatures  giving rise to these functions would settle the matter finally, but would be difficult and somewhat out of the spirit of the present inquiry.  Instead, it is proposed merely to mention imaginary reactions which give rise  to the required  functions by  the law of'  mass  action,  if  suitable reaction constants are assumed.  It will be sufficient to describe

- (i) A set of reactions producing the first morphogen at the constant rate 1, and a similar set forming the second morphogen at the same rate.
- (ii)  A set destroying the second morphogen  (Y) at the rate 7Y.
- (iii)  A set converting the first morphogen  (X)  into the second (Y) at the rate 6X.
- (iv)  A set producing the first morphogen  (X) at the rate 11  X.
- (v) A set destroying the first morphogen (X)  at the rate 6Y, so long as any of it is present. The conditions of (i)  can be fulfilled by reactions of the type A - + X, B+ Y,   where A and B are substances continually present in large and invariable concentrations. The conditions of  (ii) are satisfied by a reaction of the form Y+  D, D being an inert substance and (iii) by the reaction X+  Y  or X+  Y+ E. The remaining two sets are rather more difficult. To  satisfy the conditions of  (iv) one may suppose that Xis a catalyst for its own formaf.ion from A. The actual reactions could be the formation of  an unstable compound U by the reaction A+ X+ U, and  the  subsequent  almost instantaneous  breakdown U+ 2X. To destroy X at a rate proportional to Y as required in (v)  one may suppose that a catalyst Cis present in small  but  constant  concentration  and  immediately  combines  with  X, X+C-t V. The modified catalyst reacting with  Y ,   at a rate proportional to Y ,   restores the catalyst but not the morphogen X,  by the reactions V+ Y+ W,  W+  C+H, of which the latter is assumed instantaneous.

It should be emphasized that the reactions here described are by no means those which are most likely to give rise to instability in nature. The  choice of the reactions to be discussed was dictated entirely by the fact that it was desirable that the argument be easy to follow. More plausible reaction systems are described in 9 10.

Unstable  equilibrium  is  not,  of  course,  a  condition  which  occurs  very  naturally. It usually requires some rather artificial interference, such as placing a marble on the top of a dome.  Since systems tend to leave unstable equilibria they cannot often be in them. Such equilibria can, however, occur  naturally through  a stable equilibrium changing into an unstable one. For example, if a rod is hanging from a point a little above its centre of gravity

it will be in stable equilibrium.  If, however,  a  mouse climbs up the rod  the equilibrium eventually becomes unstable and the rod starts to swing. A chemical analogue of this mouseand-pendulum system would be that described above with the same diffusibilities but with the two morphogens produced at the rates

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This system is stable if I&lt;0 but unstable if I&gt; 0. If Iis allowed to increase, corresponding to the mouse running up the pendulum, it will eventually become positive and the equilibrium will collapse. The system which  was originally discussed was the case 1 = 2,  and might be supposed to correspond to the mouse somehow reaching the top of the pendulum without disaster, perhaps by falling vertically on to it.

## 5. LEFT-HANDED AND RIGHT-HANDED ORGANISMS

The object of this section is to discuss a certain difficulty which might be thought to show that  the  morphogen  theory  of  morphogenesis  cannot  be  right.  The difficulty  is  mainly concerned with organisms which have not got bilateral symmetry. The argument, although carried  through  here without  the use of mathematical  formulae,  may be found  difficult by non-mathematicians, and these are therefore recommended to ignore it unless they are already troubled by such a difficulty.

An organism is said to have 'bilateral symmetry' if it is identical with its own refiexion in some plane. This plane of course always has to pass through some part of the organism, in particular through its centre of gravity. For the purpose of this argument  it  is more general to consider what may be called 'left-right symmetry '. An organism has left-right symmetry if its description in any right-handed set of rectangular  Cartesian co-ordinates is identical with its description in some set of left-handed  axes. An example of a body with left-right symmetry, but not bilateral symmetry, is a cylinder with the letter P printed on one end, and with the mirror image of a P on the other end, but with the two upright strokes of the two letters not parallel.  The distinction may possibly be without a difference so far as the biological world is concerned, but mathematically it should not be ignored.

If the organisms of a species are sufficiently alike, and the absence of left-right symmetry sufficiently pronounced, it is possible to describe each individual as either right-handed or left-handed without there being difficulty in classifying any particular specimen.  In man, for instance, one could take the X-axis in the forward direction, the Y-axis at right angles to it in the direction towards the side on which the heart is felt, and the Z-axis upwards. The specimen is classed as left-handed or right-handed according as the axes so chosen are left-handed or right-handed. A new classification has of course to be defined for each species.

The fact that there exist organisms which do not  have left-right symmetry  does not in itself cause any difficulty.  It has already been explained how various kinds of symmetry can be lost in the development of the embryo, due to the particular  disturbances  (or 'noise') influencing the particular specimen not having that kind of symmetry, taken in conjunction with appropriate kinds of instability. The difficulty  lies in the fact that there are species in which the proportions of left-handed and right-handed types are very unequal.  It will be as well to describe first an argument which appears to show that this should not happen.

The argument is  very  general,  and might be  applied to a very wide  class of  theories  of inorphogenesis.

An entity may be described as 'P-symmetrical' if its description in terms of one set of right-handed axes is identical with its description in terms of any other set of right-handed axes with  the same origin.  Thus,  for instance,  the totality  of  positions  that a  corkscrew would  take up when rotated  in all possible ways about the origin  has P-symmetry.  The entity will  be  said  to  be  'F-symmetrical' when  changes  from right-handed  axes to  lefthanded may also be made. This would apply if the corkscrew were replaced by a bilaterally symmetrical object such as a coal scuttle, or a left-right symmetrical object.  In these terms one may say that there are species such that the totality  of specimens from that species, together with the rotated specimens, is  P-symmetrical, but very fir from F-symmetrical. On the other hand, it is reasonable to suppose that

- (i)  The laws of physics are F-symmetrical.
- (ii)  The initial totality of zygotes for the species is F-symmetrical.
- (iii)  The statistical  distribution of  disturbances  is  F-symmetrical.  The individual  disturbances of course will in general have neither F-symmetry nor P-symmetry.

I t  should  be  noticed  that the ideas of P-symmetry  and F-symmetry  as  defined  above apply even to so elaborate an entity as 'the laws of physics'.  I t  should also be understood that the laws are to be the laws taken into account in the theory in question rather than some ideal as yet undiscovered laws.

Now  it follows from  these  assumptions  that the statistical distribution of resulting organisms will have F-symmetry, or more strictly that the distribution deduced as the result of working out such a theory will have such symmetry. The distribution of observed mature organisms, however, has no such symmetry I n  the first place, for instance, men are more often found standing on their feet than their heads. This may be corrected by taking gravity into account in the laws, together with an appropriate change of definition of the two kinds of symmetry.  But it will be more convenient if, for the sake of argument, it is imagined that some species has been reared in the absence of gravity, and that the resulting distribution of mature organisms is found to be P-symmetrical but to yield more right-handed specimens than  left-handed  and  so  not  to  have  F-symmetry. I t  remains  therefore  to  explain  this absence of F-symmetry.

Evidently one or other of the assumptions  (i) to  (iii) must  be  wrong,  i.e.  in a  correct theory one of them would  not apply.  In  the morphogen  theory  already described  these three  assumptions  do all apply,  and it must  therefore  be  regarded  as  defective to  some extent. The theory may be corrected by taking into account the fact that the morphogens do not always have an equal number of left- and right-handed  molecules. According to one's point of view one may regard this as invalidating either (i),  (ii) or even (iii). Simplest perhaps is to say that the totality of zygotes just is not F-symmetrical, and that this could be seen if one looked at the molecules. This is, however, not very satisfactory from the point of view of this paper, as it would  not be consistent with describing states in termls of concentrations only.  It would be preferable if it was found possible to find more accurate laws concerning reactions and diffusion.  For  the purpose of  accounting for  unequal  numbers of left- and right-handed  organisms it is unnecessary to do more than show that there are corrections  which  would  not be F-symmetrical  when there are laevo-  or dextrorotatory

morphogens, and which would  be large enough to account for the effects observed.  It is not very difficult  to think of such effects. They do not have to be very large, but must, of course,  be  larger  than  the  purely  statistical  effects,  such  as  thermal  noise  or  Brownian movement.

There may also be other reasons why the totality of zygotes is not F-symmetrical, e.g. an asymmetry of the chromosomes themselves.  If these also produce a sufficiently large effect, so much the better.

Though these  effects may be large compared with  the statistical disturbances they are almost certainly small compared with the ordinary diffusion and reaction effects. This will mean that they only have an appreciable effect during a short period  in which the breakdown of left-right symmetry is occurring.  Once their existence is admitted, whether  on a theoretical or experimental basis, it is probably most convenient to give them mathematical expression  by regarding  them  as P-symmetrically  (but not F-symmetrically)  distributed disturbances.  However, they will not be considered further in this paper.

## 6. REACTIONS AND  DIFFUSION  IN A  RING  OF CELLS

The original  reason  for  considering the breakdown  of  homogeneity  was  an apparent difficulty  in  the  diffusion-reaction  theory  of  morphogenesis. Now  that  the  difficulty  is resolved it might be supposed that there is no reason for pursuing this aspect of the problem further, and that it would  be best  to proceed  to consider what occurs when the system is very far from homogeneous. A great deal more attention will nevertheless be given to the breakdown of homogeneity. This is largely because  the assumption that the system is still nearly homogeneous brings the problem within the range of what is capable of being treated mathematically.  Even so many further simplifying assumptions have to be made. Another reason for giving this phase such attention is that it is in a sense the most critical period. That is to say, that if there is any doubt as to how the organism is going to develop it is conceivable that a minute examination of it just  after instability has set in might settle the matter, but an examination of it at any earlier time could never do so.

There is a great variety of geometrical arrangement of cells which might be considered, but one particular type of configuration stands out as being particularly simple in its theory, and also illustrates the general principles very well. This configuration is a ring of similar cells.  One may suppose that there are N such cells.  It must be admitted that there is no biological example to which the theory of the ring can be immediately applied, though it is not difficult to find ones in which the principles illustrated by the ring apply.

I t  will be assumed at first that there are only two morphogens, or rather only two interesting morphogens.  There may be others whose concentration does not vary either in space or time, or which can be eliminated from the discussion for one reason or another. These other morphogens may, for instanse,  be  catalysts  involved in the reactions  between  the interesting  morphogens.  An  example  of  a  complete  system  of  reactions  is  given  in 5 10. Some consideration will also be given in $5 8,9 to the case of three morphogens. The reader should have no difficulty  in extending  the results  to any number of morphogens, but no essentially new features appear when the number is increased beyond  three.

The two morphogens will be called X and  Y.  These letters will also be used to denote their concentrations.  This need not lead to any real conf~lsion. The concentration of X in

cell r may be written X,,  and Y,  has a similar meaning.  It is convenient to regard 'cell N' and ' cell 0' as synonymous, and likewise 'cell 1 ' and cell ' N + 1 '. One can then say that for each r satisfying 1 &lt; r&lt; N cell r exchanges material by diffusion with cells r1 and r+ 1. The cell-to-cell diffusion constant for X will be called p, and that for  Y will be called v. This means that for unit concentration difference of  X,  this morphogen passes at the rate , u from the cell with  the  higher  concentration  to the  (neighbouring) cell  with  the lower concentration. It is also necessary to make assumptions about the rates ofchemical reaction. The most general assumption that can be made is that for concentrations X and Y chemical reactions are tending to increase X at the rate  f(X, Y) and Y at the rate g(X, Y). When the changes in X and Y due to diffusion are also taken into account the behaviour of the system may be described by the 2N differential equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If- f(h, k) : g(h,k) = 0,  then an isolated cell has an equilibrium with concentrations X = h, Y = k.  The ring system also has an equilibrium, stable or unstable, with each X,  equal to h and each Y ,   equal to k. Assuming that the system is not very far from this equilibrium it is convenient to put X, = h + x, , Y, -k + y,. One may also write ax + b y   for  f ( h + x, y ik)  and c x + d y   for g(h +x, y -tk). Sincef(h,  k) = g(h,k) = 0 no  constant  terms  are required,  and since x and y are supposed small the terms in higher powers of x and y will have relatively little effect and one is justisfied in ignoring them. The  four quantities a, b, c, d may be called the ' marginal reaction rates'. Collectively they may be described as the ' marginal reaction rate matrix'. When there are  Mmorphogens this matrix consists of M2 numbers. A rnarginal reaction rate has the dimensions of the reciprocal of  a time, like a radioactive decay  rate, which is in fact an example of a marginal (nuclear) reaction rate.

With these assumptions the equations can be rewritten as

These relations can also be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To solve the equations  one introduces  new co-ordinates  to, ..., EN',\_,  and yo, .  .  .,v,~\_, by putting

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as may be shown by using the equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(referred to in $2). Making this substitution one obtains

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Likewise

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equations have now been converted into a quite manageable form, with the variables separated. There are now  two  equations  concerned  with  El  and gl,  two  concerned with t2 and y2, etc. The equations themselves are also of a well-known standard form, being linear with constant coefficients.  Let p, and pi be the roots of the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(with B?fs &gt;gf: for definiteness), then the solution of the equations is of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where,  however,  the coefficients A,, B,, C , D, are not independent but are restricted  to satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If it should happen that$, = f : the equations (6.9) have to be replaced by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and (6.10) remains true.  Substituting back into (6.3) and replacing the variables x , , y , by X,, Y,. (the actual concentrations) the solution can be written

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here A,,  B,,  C,, D, are still related by (6.10),  but otherwise are arbitrary complex numbers; p, and 8 1 are the roots of (6.8).

The expression (6.1 1) gives the general solution of the equations (6.1) when one:  assumes that  departures  from  homogeneity  are sufficiently  small  that  the  functions f(X, Y)  and g(X, Y) can safely be taken as linear. The form (6.11)given is not very informative.  It will be considerably simplified in § 8. Another implicit assumption concerns random disturbing influences. Strictly  speaking  one  should  consider  such  influences  to  be  continuously  at work. This would  make the mathematical treatment considerably more difficult without substantially  altering the conclusions.  The assumption which  is  implicit in the analysis, here and in $8, is  that the state of the system at t = 0 is  not one of homogeneity,  since it has been displaced from such a state by the disturbances; but after t -0 further disturbances are ignored.  I n § 9 the theory is reconsidered without this latter assumption.

## 7. CONTINUOUS RING OF TISSUE

As an alternative to a ring of separate cells one might prefer to consider a continuous ring of  tissue.  I n  this  case one can describe the position  of a point of the ring by  the angle 0 which a radius to the point  makes with  a fixed reference radius.  Let the diffusibilities  of the two substances be /L' and v ' . These are not quite the same as 1 1 and v of the last section, since p and v are in effect referred to a cell diameter as unit of length, whereas I L ' and v ' are referred to a conventioiial unit, the same unit in which the radius p of the ring is measured. Then

The equations are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which will be seen to be the limiting case of (6.2).  The marginal reaction rates a, b, c, d are, as before,  the values at the equilibrium position of dJ;/dX, df/ldY,  dg/dX, dg/dY. The general solution of the equations is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ps, P's are now roots of and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This solution may be  justified  by considering the limiting case of the solution (6.1  1).Alternatively,  one may observe that the formula proposed is a solution, so that it only remains to prove that it is the most general one. This will follow if values of A,, B,, C,, D, can be found

to fit any given initial conditions.  I t   is well known that any function of an angle (such as X ) can be expanded as a 'Fourier series '

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

provided, for instance, that its first derivative is continuous.  If also

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then the required initial conditions  are satisfied provided A, + B, -G,  and C, 4D, = H,. Values A,,  B,,  C,,  D,  to satisfy these conditions can be found unlessp, = p:. This is an exceptional case and its solution if required may be found as the limit of the normal case.

## 8.  TYPES OF ASYMPTOTIC  BEHAVIOUK  IN  THE  RING  AFTER  A  LAPSE  OF TIME

As the reader was reminded in 5 2, after a lapse of time the behaviour of an expression of the form of (6.1 1)is eventually dominated by the terms for which the corresponding p,  has the largest real part. There may, however, be several terms for which this real part has the same value, and these  terms will together  dominate the situation,  the other terms being ignored by comparison. There will, in fact, normally be either two or four such 'leading' terms.  For ifpso  is one of them then p,-,, = pso,since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so  that psoand p,-,, are roots  of  the  same  equation  (6.8).  If also p,, is  complex  then Bps, = 92pio,  and so in all

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One need not, however, normally anticipate that any further terms will have to be included. Ifpso  andpSl  are to have the same real part, then, unless s, = s,  or s, +s, = N the quantities a, b,  c,  d, p, v will be restricted to satisfy  some special condition, which they would be unlikely to satisfy by chance.  I t   is possible to find circumstances in which as many as ten terms have to be included if such special conditions are satisfied, but these have no particular physical or biological importance.  I t  is assumed below that none of these chance relations hold.

I t  has  already been seen that it is  necessary  to distinguish the cases where the value of pSo for one of the dominant terms is real from those where it is complex. These may be called respectively the stationary and the oscillatory cases.

Stationary case.  After a sufficient lapse of time X, -h  and Y, -k approach asymptotically to the forms

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Oscillatory case.  After  a sufficient lapse of time X, -h  and  Y,.k approach the forms

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The real part ofp,,,  has been represented by I,standing for 'instability', and in the oscillatory case its imaginary part is w. By the use of the 2 % operation (real part of), two terms have in each case been combined in one.

The meaning of these formulae may be conveniently described  in terms of waves.  In the stationary case there are stationary waves on the ring having so lobes or crests.  The coefficients Aso and Cso  are in a definite ratio given by  (6.10), so that the pattern  for  one morphogen determines that for the other. With the lapse of time the waves become more pronounced provided there is genuine instability, i.e. if Iis positive. The  wave-length of the waves may be obtained by dividing the number of lobes into the circumference of the ring. I n   the oscillatory case the interpretation is similar, but the waves are now not stationary but travelling.  As  well  as  having  a  wave-length  they  have  a  velocity  and  a  frequency.  The frequency is  w/2n,  and  the velocity  is  obtained  by  multiplying  the wave-length  by  the frequency. There are two wave trains moving round the ring in opposite directions.

The wave-lengths of the patterns on the ring do not depend only on the chemical data a, b,  c,  d, p',  v'  but on the circumference of the ring, since they must be submultiples of the latter. There is a sense, however, in which there is a 'chemical wave-length' which does not depend on the dimensions of the ring. This may be described as the limit to which the wavelengths tend when the rings are made successively larger. Alternatively (at any rate in the case of continuous tissue), it may be described as the wave-length when the radius is chosen to give the largest possible instability I. One may picture the situation by supposing that the chemical wave-length  is  true wave-length which is  achieved  whenever  possible,  but that on a ring it is necessary  to 'make  do' with an  approximation which  divides  exactly into the circumference.

Although all the possibilities are covered by the stationary and oscillatory alternatives there are special cases of them which deserve to be treated separately.  One of these occurs when so == 0, and may be described as the 'case of extreme long wave-length',  though this term may perhaps preferably be reserved to describe the chemical data when they are such that so  is zero whatever the dimensions of the ring. There is also the case of 'extreme short wave-length'.  This means that sin2  (nso/N)  is as large as possible, which is achieved  by so being  either  &amp;N,  or i ( N 1 ) . If the remaining possibilities are regarded  as forming the 'case of finite wave-length',  there are six subcases altogether.  It will  be shown that each of these really can occur, although two of them require three or more morphogens for their realization.

(a)  Stationary  case  with  extreme  long  wave-length. This  occurs  for  instance  if , u   = v = 2,

b

=

c

=

1,

a

=

d. Then  p,

=

a

-

sin2

I T S

- -

N

+

1.This is certainly real and is greatest when s

=

0.

I n  this case the contents of all the cells are the same; there is no resultant flow from cell to cell due to diffusion,  so that each is behaving  as if it were isolated. Each is in unstable equilibrium, and slips out of it in synchronism with the others.

( 6 ) Oscillatory case  with  extreme  long  wave-length.  This  occurs,  for  instance,  if p = v =  &amp;,

b

=

-c

=

1,

a

=

d.  Then p,

=

a

- - sin2-

f

i.  This is  complex and its real  part is  greatest

I T S

N

when s = 0. As in case (a)  each cell behaves as ifit were isolated. The  difference from case (a) is that the departure from the equilibrium is oscillatory.

- (c) Stationary  waves of extreme short  wave-length. This occurs, for instance, if v = 0, y = 1, d = I , a = I - 1 , b = - c l . p , i s

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and is greatest when sin2 ( n s / N ) is greatest.  If Nis even the contents of each cell are similar to those of the next but one, but distinctly different from those of its immediate neighbours. If, however, the number of cells is odd this arrangement is impossible, and the magnitude of the difference between neighbouring cells varies round the ring, from zero at one point to a maximum at a point diametrically opposite.

FIGURE 1. Values  of ~?2p (instability  or  growth  rate), and  IYfl I (radian frequency  of oscillation), related to wave-length 2nU-8 as in the relation  (8.3) with I= 0. This is a case of stationary waves with  finite wave-length. Full line, 9 p ; broken line, - I Yfi / (zero for U&gt; 0.071) ; dotted line, 9f1. The full  circles  on  the  curve  for 9f indicate  the  values  of U, p actually  achievable  on the finite ring considered  in 5 10, with s = 0 on the extreme left, s = 5 on the right.

<!-- image -->

- (d) Stationary  waves ofjinite wave-length. This is the case which is of greatest interest, and has  most  biological  application.  I t  occurs,  for  instance,  if a = 1-2, b = 2.5, c --1.25,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

7 T s the number of cells in it.  If one writes U for then equation (6.8) can, with these special values, be written

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This has a solution p = Iif  U =  $. On the other hand, it will be shown that if U has any other  (positive) value then both roots for j-I  have negative real parts.  Their product is positive being i(U-$)2,  so that if they are real they both have the same sign. Their sum in this case is -+ -%Uwhich is negative. Their common sign is therefore negative. If, however, the roots are complex their real parts are both equal to -&amp;-$U, which is negative.

! 7iSo If the radius p of  the ring be chosen so that for some integer so, t = U = sin2 - f l , ( $ 1 there will be stationary waves with so  lobes and a wave-length which is  also equal to the chemical wave-length, for p,,, will be equal to I,whereas every otherp, will have a real part 7 1 s 1 smaller than I. If, however, the radius is chosen so that cannot hold with an integral s, then (in this example) the actual number of lobes will be one of the two1 integers nearest to the (non-integral) solutions of this equation, and usually the nearest.  Examples can, however, be constructed where this simple rule does not apply.

Figure 1 shows the relation  (8.3) in graphical form. The curved portions of the graphs are hyperbolae.

The two remaining possibilities can only occur with three or more morphogens. With one morphogen the only possibility is (a).

- (e) Oscillatory case  with  ajnite wave-length.  This means that there are genuine travelling waves.  Since the example to be given involves three morphogens it is  not possible to use the formulae of tj 6.  Instead, one must use the corresponding three morphogen formulae. That which corresponds to (6.8) or (7.3) is most conveniently written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

7 1 s where again U has  been written for smZN. (This means essentially that U = where h is the  wave-length.) The  four marginal reactivities are superseded by nine a, , , ... , a,,, and the three diffusibilities are  p,, p,,  p,. Special values leading to travelling waves are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and with them (8.4) reduces to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If U = 1 the roots are i and -2. If U is  near to I they are approximately -1 -U and &amp; i + (U18 1 ) 2 (  &amp; i -1))and all have negative real parts.  If the greatest real part is not the value zero, achieved with U = 1, then the value zero must be reached again at some intermediate value of  U.  Since P is  then pure imaginary the even terms of  (8.6) must vanish, i.e. ( p 2 + 1)  ( U +  1) = 0.  But this can only happen ifp = f i, and the vanishing of the odd terms then shows that  U = 1.  Hence zero is the largest real part for  any root p of  (8.6). The corresponding p is i i and U is  1.  This means that there are travelling waves with unit (chemical) radian frequency and unit (chemical) velocity.  If Iis added to a,,, a,,  and a,,, the instability will become Iin place of zero.

(f' ) Oscillatory case with extreme short wave-length. This means that there is metabolic oscillation with neighbouring cells nearly 180" out of phase.  It can be achieved with three morphogens and the following chemical data:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With these values (8.4) reduces to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This may be shown to have all the real parts of its roots negative if  U&gt; 0, for if U = 0 the roots are near to -0.6, -0.2% 1.3i, and if l J be continuously increased the values ofp will alter continuously.  If they ever attain values with a positive real part they must pass through pure imaginary values  (or zero).  But if ; D is  pure  imaginary p3 t 2p  and  (p2+ 1) (C'+ 1) must both vanish, which is impossible if U 20. As U approaches infinity, however, one of the roots approaches i. Thus 3?p = 0 can be approaclled as closely as desired by large values of I ; : but not attained.

## 9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING

In this section some of the finer  points concerning the development of wave patterns arc considered.  These will be  of interest mainly  to  those who wish  to do further research  on the subject, and can well be omitted on a first reading.

- (1) Generalformulae for  the t w o   morplzogen  case.  Taking the limiting case of a ring of large radius (or a filament), one may write n-S = U ---in (6.1 I )   or s2 -=. U = o2 in (7.3) and obtain пр,

which has the solution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One may put I ( U ) for the real part of this, representing the instability for waves of wavelength R = of I(U). This maxi2n-U-+. The dominant waves correspond to the maxim~~m mum may either be at U = 0 or U = co or at  a stationary  point on the  part of the curve which is hyperbolic  (rather  than straight). When this last case occurs the values of p (or I) and 0at the maximum are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The conditions which lead to the four cases (a), ( h ) , (c),  (d) described in the last section are (a)  (Stationary waves of extreme long wave-length.)  This occurs if either

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The condition for instability in either case is that either bc&gt;ad  or a+d&gt; 0.

- (6) (Oscillating  case  with  extreme  long  wave-length,  i.e.  synchronized  oscillations.) This occurs if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There is instability if in addition n f d &gt; 0.

- (G) (Stationary waves of extreme short wave-length.)  This occurs if  bc&lt;O, p':&gt;v' = 0. There is instability if, in addition, a + d&gt; 0.
- (d)  (Stationary waves of finite wave-length.)  This occurs if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and there is instability if also

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

I t  has  been  assumed that v' &lt;pf &gt; 0.  The case where p'  Gv' &gt; 0 can be obtained by interchanging the two morphogens.  In the  case p' = v' = 0 there is  no co-operation  between the cells whatever.

Some additional formulae will be given for the case of stationary waves of finite wavelength.  The  marginal  reaction  rates  may  be  expressed  parametrically  in  terms  of  the diffusibilities,  the  wave-length,  the  instability,  and  two  other  parameters  a  an.d X. Of these a may be described as the ratio of X-h to Y-k in the waves. The expressioris for the marginal reaction rates in terms of these parameters are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and when these are substituted into (9.2) it becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here 2nU;*  is the chemical wave-length  and 2vU-4  the wave-length  of the Fourier component under consideration. x must be positive for case (d) to apply.

If s be regarded as a continuous variable one can consider (9.2) or (9-6)as relating s top, and dplds and d2p/ds2 have  meaning.  The value  of  d2p/ds2  at the maximum is  of  some interest, and will be used below in this section.  Its value is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (2)  I n   $$6,7,8  it was supposed  that the disturbances were not continuously operative, and that the marginal reaction rates did not change with the passage of time. These assumptions  will now  be dropped,  though it will  be necessary  to make some other, less  drastic,

approximations to replace  them.  The  (statistical) amplitude of  the  'noise' disturbances will be assumed constant in time.  Instead of (6-6), (6.7), one then has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where [,   g have been written for &amp;,g , since s may now be supposed fixed.  For the same reason a -4p sin2 7ls -has been replaced by a' and d4 v sin2 7ls -by d'. The noise disturbances N N may be supposed to constitute white noise, i.e. if (t,, t,)  and (t,,  t,)  are two non-overlapping intervals then St: R,  (t)  dt and ~ , ( t ) dt are statistically independent  and each is,norlnally distributed with variancesP, (t, -t,) andP,  (t, -t,)  respectively, P, being a constant describing the amplitude of the noise.  Likewise for R2(t),  the constant P,  being replaced  by P2. I f p and p' are the roots of  (p -a') (p -d') -bc and p is the greater  (both being real), one can make the substitution which transfornls  (9.8) into

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with  a  similar equation  for  v,  of which  the leading  terms are dvldt =pfv. This indicates that v will be small, or at  least small in comparison with u after a lapse oftime.  Ifit  is assumed that v = 0 holds  (9.1  1) may be written

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

The solution of this equation is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One is, however,  not so much interested in such a solution in terms of the statistical disturbances as in the consequent statistical  distribution  of  values  of  u,  5 and q at  various times after instability has set in.  In view of the properties of 'white noise' assumed above, the values of u  at time  t will  be  distributed  according  to the normal  error law, with  the variance

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There are two commonly occurring cases in which one can simplify this expression considerably without great loss of accuracy.  If the system is in a  distinctly stable state, then q(t),

which is near to p(t), will be distinctly negative,  and exp will be small unless w is near to t.  But then L,(w) and L2(w)  may be replaced by Ll(t)  and L2(t)  in the integral, and also q(z) may be replaced by q(t).  With these approximations the variance is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A second case where there is a convenient approximation concerns times when the system is unstable, so that q(t) &gt; 0.  For the approximation concerned to apply 2 1 , t q(z)dz  must have its maximum at the last moment w(=  to)  when q(t,) = 0, and it must be the maxirrlum by a considerable margin (e.g. at least 5 ) over all other local maxima.  These conditions would apply for instance if q(z) were always increasing and had negative values at a sufficiently early  time.  One  also  requires q1(t0) (the  rate of increase of q  at time to)  to be reasonably large; it must at  least be so large that over a period of time oflength (q'(to))-* near to to  the changes in Ll(t)  and L2(t)  are small, and q'(t) itself must not appreciably alter in this period.  Under these circumstances the integrand is  negligible when  w  is  considerably  different from  to, in comparison with its values at that time, and therefore one may replace L,(w) and L2(w) by &amp;(to) and &amp;(to),  and ql(w)  by q1(t0). This gives the value

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for the variance of u.

The physical significance of this latter approximation is that the disturbances near the time when the instability is zero are the only ones which have any  appreciable ultimate effect. Those which  occur earlier are damped  out by  the subsequent period  of stability. Those which  occur later have  a shorter period  of instability within which  to  develop to greater amplitude. This principle is familiar in radio, and is fundamental to the theory of the superregenerative receiver.

Naturally one does not often wish to calculate the expression (9.17), but it is valuable as justifying  a  common-sense point  of  view  of  the  matter.  The  factor  exp[jtlq(z) dz] is essentially the integrated instability and describes the extent to which  one would  expect disturbances of appropriate wave-length to grow between times to and t. Taking the terms in ,dl,  /I2 into consideration separately, the factor JnP1 (ql(to))-* (Ll  (to))  indicates that the disturbances on the first morphogen should be regarded as lasting for a time

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The dimensionless quantities bLl(to),  bL2(to) will not usually be sufficiently large or small to  justify their detailed calculation.

- (3) The extent to which the component for whichp, is greatest may be expected to outdistance the others will now be considered in case (d).  The greatest of the  p,  will be called pso. The two closest competitors to so  will be so -1and so + 1 ; it is required to determine how close the competition is.  If the variation in the chemical data is sufficiently  small iit may be assumed  that,  although  the  exponents p,-,, p,,,   pso+, may  themselves vary  appreciably in time, the differences  p,, -p,,-l and p,,  -p,,+ are constant.  It certainly can happen that

one of these differences is zero or nearly zero, and there is then 'neck  and neck' competition. The weakest competition occurs when$,,-, =p,,+,.  I n  this case

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

But if so  is  reasonably large -2ps0{-$,0\_1 can be set equal to  (d2$/ds2),=,,. It may be concluded that the rate at which the most quickly growing component grows cannot exceed the rate for its closest competitor by more than about &amp;(d2~/ds2),=,,. The formula (9.7), by which d2p/ds2 can be estimated, may be regarded as the product of two factors. The dimensionless factor never exceeds 4. The factor J(p'v')/p2 may be described in very rough terms as 'the  reciprocal  of the time for the morphogens to diffuse a length equal to a radius'.  In equally rough terms one may say that a time of this order of magnitude is required for the most quickly growing component to get a lead, amounting to a factor whose logarithm is of the order of unity,  over its closest  competitors, in the favourable case where p,,-,  =p,,+,.

(4)  Very little has yet been said about the effect of considering non-linear reaction rate functions when far from homogeneity. Any treatment so systematic as that given for the linear case seems to be out of the question.  I t   is possible, however, to reach some qualitative conclusions about the effects of non-linear terms.  Suppose that zl is the amplitude of the Fourier component which is most unstable (on a basis of the linear terms), and which may be supposed to have wave-length A.  The  non-linear terms will cause components with wavelengths +A,  +A, $A, .  .  . to appear as well as a space-independent component. If only quadratic terms are taken into account and if these are somewhat small, then the component of wavelength $A  and the space-independent component will be the strongest.  Suppose these have amplitudes z2  and z,. The  state of the system is thus being described by the numbers zO, z,, 2,. I n  the absence of non-linear terms they would satisfy equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and if there is slight instability$,  would be a small positive number, butp, andp, distinctly negative. The effect of the non-linear terms is to replace these equations by ones of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a first approximation one may put dzo/dt = dz,/dt -0 and ignore zf and higher powers; zo and zl are then found to be proportional to z:, and the equation for z, can be written dzl/dt = poz,  -kzg. The sign of k in this differential equation is of great importance.  If it is positive, then the effect  of the tern1  kzg is to arrest the exponential growth ofz, at the value J(pl/k). The 'instability' is then very confined in its effect, for the waves can only reach a finite amplitude, and this amplitude tends to zero as the instability (p,) tends to zero.  If, however, k is negative the growth becomes something even faster than exponential, and, ifthe equation dzl/dt = 6, zl -kzg held universally, it would result in the amplitude becoming

infinite in a  finite  time.  This phenomenon  may be  called  'catastrophic  instability'.  In the  case  of  two-dimensional  systems  catastrophic  instability  is  almost  universal,  and the corresponding equation takes  the form dzl/dt = 1, z, + kz?.  IVaturally  enough in the case  of  catastrophic instability  the amplitude does not really  reach  infinity, but when it is  sufficiently  large  some  effect  previously  ignored  becomes  large  enough  to  halt  the growth.

- (5)  Case  (a) as described in fj8 represents  a most  extremely featureless form of pattern development. This may be remedied quite simply by making less drastic simplifying assumptions, so that a less gross account of the pattern can be given by the theory.  I t   was  assumed in $ 9   that only the most unstable Fourier components would contribute appreciably to the pattern, though it was seen above  (heading (3) of this section) that  (in case  (d)) this will only apply if the period of time involved is adequate to permit the morphogens, supposed for this purpose to be chemically inactive, to diffuse over the whole ring or organ concerned. The same may be shown to apply for case (a). If this assumption is dropped a much more interesting form of pattern can be accounted for.  To do this it is necessary  to consider not merely the components with U = 0 but some  others with small posj  tive values of U.  One may assume the form At -BU  for p. Linearity in U is assumed because only small values of  U are concerned, and the term At is included to represent the steady increase in instability. By measuring time from the moment of zero instability the necessity for a constant term is avoided. The formula  (9.17) may be applied to estimate the statistical distribution of the

amplitudes of the components.  Only the factor exp [ 2 It: q(z)  dz I will depend very much on U,  and taking q(t) = p(t) = At-BU, to must be BU/A and the factor is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The term in U 2   can be ignored if At2  is fairly large, for then either B2U2/A2 is smiill or the factor eUBUtis. But At2  certainly is large  if the factor eAt2, applying when U = 0, is large.  With this  approximation  the variance  takes  the  form  Ce-*"u, with  only  the  two  parameters C, k to distinguish the pattern populations.  By choosing appropriate units of concentration and length  these  pattern  populations  may  all  be  reduced  to  a  standard  one,  t:.g.  with C = k = 1. Random members of this population may be produced by considering any one of the type (a) systems to which the approximations used above apply. They are also produced, but with only a very small amplitude scale, if a homogeneous one-morphogen system undergoes random disturbances without diffusion for a period, and then diffusion without disturbance. This process is very convenient for computation, and can also be applied to two  dimensions.  Figure 2 shows such  a  pattern,  obtained  in  a  few  hours  by  a  manual computation.

To be more definite a set of numbers u,,, was chosen, each being + 1, and taking the two values with equal probability. A functionf(x,  y) is related to these numbers by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

I n  the actual computation a somewhat crude approximation to the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

was used and h was about 0.7.  In the figure the set of points where f(x, y) is positive is shown black.  The outlines of the black patches are somewhat less irregular than they should be due to an inadequacy in the computation procedure.

<!-- image -->

I

FIGURE 2. An  example  of  a  'dappled' pattern  as  resulting  from  a  type  (a)  morphogen  system. A marker of unit length is shown.  See text, $9, 11.

## 10. A NUMERICAL  EXAMPLE

The numerous approximations and assumptions that have been made in the foregoing analysis may be rather confusing to many readers.  In the present section it is proposed  to consider in detail a single example of the case of most interest,  (d). This will be made as specific  as possible.  It  is unfortunately not possible to specify actual chemical reactions with the required properties, but it is thought that the reaction rates associated with the imagined reactions are not unreasonable.

The detail to be specified includes

- (i)  The number and dimensions of the cells of the ring.
- (ii)  The diffusibilities of the morphogens.
- (iii)  The reactions concerned.
- (iv)  The rates at which the reactions occur.
- (v)  Information about random disturbances.
- (vi)  Information about the distribution, in space and time, of those morphogens which are of the nature of evocators.

These will be taken in order.

- (i)  I t   will be assumed that there are  twenty cells in the ring, and that they have a diameter of  0.1 mm each. These cells are certainly on the large rather than the small side, but by no means impossibly so. The number of cells in the ring has been chosen rather small in order that it should not be necessary to make the approximation of continuous tissue.
- (ii)  Two morphogens are considered. They will be called X and Y,  and the same letters will be used for their concentrations. This will not lead to any real confusion. The diffusion constant for X will be assumed to be 5 x 10cm2  s-l  and that for Y to be 2.5 x crn2s-l. With cells of  diameter 0.01 cni this means that X flows between neighbouring cells at the

rate 5 x lop4of the difference of X-content of the two cells per second.  In other  words, if there is  nothing altering the concentrations but diffusion the difference of concentrations suffers an exponential  decay with  time constant 1000  s, or  'half-period'  of  700 s.  These times are doubled for Y.

If the cell membrane is regarded as the only obstacle to diffusion the permeability of the membranes to the morphogen is 5 x cm/s or 0.018 cm/h. Values as large as 0.1 cm/h have been observed (Davson &amp; Danielli 1943, figure 28).

- (iii)  The reactions  are  the  most  important  part  of  the  assumptions.  Four  substances A, X, Y,  B are involved; these are isomeric, i.e. the molecules  of the four substances are all rearrangements of the same atoms. Substances C, C',  Wwill also be concerned. The  thermodynamics of the problem will not be discussed except to say that it is contemplated that of the substances A, X, Y, B the one with the greatest free energy is A,  and that with the least is B.  Energy for the whole process is obtained by the degradation ofA into B. The  substance Cis in effect a catalyst for the reaction  Y+  X, and may also be regarded as an evocator, the system being unstable if there is a sufficient concentration of C

The reactions postulated are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (iv)  For  the purpose of stating the reaction  rates special units will  be  introduced  (for the purpose of this section only). They will be based on a period of 1000  s as units; of time, and 10-l1  mole/cm3  as concentration unit*. There will be little occasion to use any but these special  units  (s.u.).The concentration of  A  will  be  assumed  to  have  the large value  of 1000  s.u.  and the catalyst C, together with its combined form C' the concentration lQ-3(l + y) s.u., the dimensionless quantity y being often supposed somewhat small, though values over as large a range as from  -0.5 to 0.5 may be considered. The rates assumed will be

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the values assumed for A and C' the net effect of these reactions is to convert X into Y at the rate &amp;[50XY+  7X2-  55(1+ y)] at the same time producing X at the constant rate &amp;, and destroying  Y at the rate Y/16.  If, however, the concentration of  Y is zero and the rate of increase of Y required by these formulae is negative, the rate of conversion of Y  into Xis reduced sufficiently to permit Y to remain zero.

* A somewhat  larger value  of  concentration unit  (e.g.  lop9mole/cm3) is probably  more suitable.  The choice of unit only affects the calculations through the amplitude of the random disturbances.

I n  the special units , L L = 4, v = i.

(v)  Statistical  theory  describes  in  detail  what  irregularities  arise  from  the  molecular nature of  matter.  In a period in which, on the average, one should  expect  a  reaction  to occur between n pairs  (or other combinations) of molecules, the actual number will differ from the mean by an amount whose mean square is also n,  and is distributed according to the normal error law. Applying this to a reaction proceeding at a rate F (s.u.)  ancl taking the volume of the cell as cm3 (assuming some elongation tangentially  to the ring) it will be found that the root mean square irregularity cf  the quantity reacting in a period 7 of time  (s.u.)is 0.004 ,l(Fr).

TABLE 1. SOME STATIONARY-WAVE PATTERNS

|        | first specimen      | first specimen      | first specimen         | first specimen         | second              | 'slow     |                |                |
|--------|---------------------|---------------------|------------------------|------------------------|---------------------|-----------|----------------|----------------|
| cell   | incipient pattern 1 | incipient pattern 1 | final pattern /------. | final pattern /------. | specimen: incipient | incipient | four-lobed - < | four-lobed - < |
| number | X                   | 7 Y                 | X                      | I '                    | Y                   | Y         | X'             | Y              |

The diffusion of a rnorphogen from a cell to a neighbour may be treated as if the passage of a molecule from one cell to another were a monomolecular reaction; a rnolecule must be imagined to change its form slightly as it passes the cell wall.  If the diffusion constant for a wall is p, and quantities M,, M2  of the relevant morphogen lie on the two sides of it, the root-mean-square irregularity in the amount passing the wall in a period T is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These two sources of irregularity are the most significant of those which arise from truly statistical cause,  and  are the only  ones which are taken  into account in the calculations whose  results  are given  below.  There  may  also  be  disturbances  due to  the presence  of neighbouring anatomical structures, and other similar causes. These are of great importance, but of too great variety and complexity to be suitable for consideration here.

(vi)  The only morphogen  which is  being treated  as an evocator is  C'.  Changes in the concentration of A might have similar effects, but the change would have to be rather great. I t   is preferable to assume that A is a 'fuel  substance'  (e.g.  glucose) whose concentration does

not change. The concentration of C, together with its combined form C', will be supposed the same in all cells, but it changes with the passage of time.  Two different varieties of the problem will be considered, with slightly different assumptions.

The results are shown in table 1. There are eight columns, each of which gives ihe concentration of a  morphogen  in each of the twenty cells; the circumstances  to which these concentrations refer differ from column  to column. The  first five columns all refer to the  same 'variety' of the imaginary organism, but there are two specimens shown. The specimens differ  merely  in the chance factors which  were involved.  With  this  variety  the value of y was allowed to increase at the rate of 2-7 s.u. from the value -; to +&amp;. At this point a  pattern had definitely begun to appear, and was  recorded.  The parameter y was then allowed to decrease at the same rate to zero and then remained there until there was no

FIGURE 3. Concentrations  of  Y  in  the  development  of  the  first  specimen  (taken from  table  1). -------original homogeneous equilibrium; / / / / / / incipient pattern; ---final equilibrium.

<!-- image -->

more appreciable change. The pattern was then recorded again. The concentrations of  Y in these two recordings are shown in figure 3 as well as in table 1. For the second specimen only one column of figures is given, viz. those for the Y morphogen in the incipient pattern. At this stage the X values are closely related to the Y values, as may be seen from the first specimen (or  from theory). The  final values can be made almost indistinguishable from those for the first specimen by renumbering the cells and have therefore not been given. These two  specimens may  be  said  to  belong  to  the  'variety with  quick  cooking', because  the instability is  allowed  to increase so quickly that the pattern appears relatively solon. The effect of  this haste might  be regarded as rather unsatisfactory,  as the incipient  pattern is very  irregular.  I n  both  specimens  the four-lobed  component  is  present  in considerable strength in the incipient  pattern.  I t  'beats' with  the three-lobed  component producing considerable irregularity. The relative magnitudes of the three- and four-lobed components depend on chance and vary from specimen to specimen. The four-lobed component may often be the stronger, and may occasionally be so strong that the final pattern is four-lobed. How often  this happens is not known, but the pattern, when it occurs, is shown in the last

two columns of the table. In this case the disturbances were supposed removed for some time before recording, so as to give a perfectly regular pattern.

The remaining column refers to a second variety, one with  'slow cooking'.  In this the value of y was allowed to increase only at the rate 10-j.  Its initial value was -0.010, but is of no significance. The final value was 0.003. With this pattern, when shown graphically, the irregularities are definitely perceptible, but are altogether overshadowed by the threelobed component. The possibility of  the ultimate pattern being four-lobed is not to be taken seriously with this variety.

The set of reactions chosen is such that the instability becomes 'catastrophic' when the second-order terms are taken into account, i.e. the growth of the waves tends to make the whole system more unstable  than ever.  This effect is finally halted  when  (in some cells) the concentration of  Y has become zero.  The constant conversion of  Y  into X through the agency of the catalyst Ccan then no longer continue in these cells,  and the continued growth of the amplitude of the waves is arrested. When y = 0 there is of course an equilibrium with X = Y -1 in all cells, which  is very slightly stable. There are, however, also other stable equilibria with y = 0, two of which are shown in the table. These final equilibria may, with some trouble but little difficulty, be verified to be solutions of the equations (6.1) with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The morphogen concentrations recorded at the earlier times connect more directly with the theory given in $$ 6 to 9.  The amplitude of the waves was then still sufficiently small for the approximation of linearity to be still appropriate, and consequently the 'catastrophic' growth had not yet set in.

The functions  f(X, Y) and g(X, Y) of 5 6 depend also on y  and are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

I n  applying the theory it will be as well to consider principally the behaviour of the system when  y  remains  permanently  zero.  Then  for  equilibrium f(X, Y) = g(X, Y) = 0  which means  that  X = Y = 1,  i.e.  h = k = 1.  One  also  finds  the  following  values  for  various quantities mentioned in $$ 6 to 9 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(The relation between p and U for these chemical data, and the values j,, can be seen in figure 1, the values being so related as to make the curves apply to this example as well as that in§  8.)  The  value s = 3.333 leads one to expect a three-lobed pattern as the commonest, and this is confirmed by the values p,,.  The four-lobed pattern is evidently the closest competitor. The  closeness of the competition may be  judged from the differencep, -p, = 0.0084,

which suggests that the three-lobed component takes about 120  S.U.  or  about 33 h  to  gain an advantage of a neper (i.e. about 2.7 : 1)over the four-lobed one.  However, the fact that y  is different from 0 and is changing invalidates this calculation to some extent.

The figures in table 1 were mainly obtained with the aid of the Manchester Uiniversity Computer.

Although the above example is quite adequate to illustrate the mathematical principles involved it may be thought that the chemical reaction system is somewhat artificial. The following  example  is  perhaps  less  so.  The same  'special units'  are used.  The reactions assumed are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The effect of the reactions XS  Y z   C is that C = 10-3XY. The reaction  C+D  destroys  C, and therefore in effect both X and Y,  at the rate AXY. The reaction A+  X forms X at the constant rate 1, and the pair  Y+  V-t  V'+ E+ V destroys  Y at the constant rate &amp;/?. The pair  B +  C+  W+  Y+ C forms  Y at the rate +XY, and  Y-t E destroys it at the rate &amp;Y. The total effect therefore is that Xis produced at the rate  f(X, Y) == h(16-  XY), and Y at the rate g(X, Y) = &amp;(XYY-1). However, g(X, Y) = 0 if Y&lt;O.  The diffusion constants will be supposed to be p =  +, v =&amp;. The homogeneity condition gives hk -16, k : = 16- 1 .

4 k

I t   will be seen from conditions (9.4a) that case (d) applies if and only if -4-&lt;2.7!5,  i.e. if k k 4 lies  between  1-725  and 9,257.  Condition  (9.46) shows that  there will be instability if in R k addition --+-&gt;,/3++, i.e.  if k  does not lie between  4.98  and 12.8. I t  will  also be found k 8

that the wave-length corresponding to k = 4.98 is 4.86 cell diameters.

I n  the case of a ring of six cells with 1 = 12 there is  a  stable equilibrium, as shown in table 2.

## TABLE 2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

I t   should be recognized that these equilibria are only dynamic equilibria. The nnolecules which together makeup  the  chemicalwaves  are  continuallychanging,  though their  concentrations in any particular  cell  are only  undergoing small statistical  fluctuations.  NCoreover,

in  order  to  maintain  the  wave  pattern  a  continual  supply  of  free  energy  is  required. I t  is  clear  that  this  must  be  so  since  there is  a  continual  degradation  of  energy through diffusion. This energy is supplied through the 'fuel substances'  (A, B in the last example), which are degraded into ' waste products ' (D, E) .

## 11. RESTATEMENT AND BIOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS

Certain  readers  may  have  preferred  to  omit  the  detailed  mathematical  treatment  of $5  6  to  10.  For their benefit the assumptions and results  will be briefly summarized, with some change of emphasis.

The system considered was either a ring of cells each in contact with its neighbours, or a  continuous  ring  of  tissue.  The effects are extremely similar  in  the two  cases.  For  the purposes of this summary it is not necessary to distinguish between them. A system with two or three morphogens only was considered, but the results apply quite generally. The system was supposed to be initially in a stable homogeneous condition, but disturbed slightly from this  state  by  some  influences unspecified,  such  as  Brownian  movement  or  the effects of neighbouring structures  or slight  irregularities  of  form.  I t  was  supposed  also  that  slow changes are taking place in the reaction rates (or, possibly, the diffusibilities) of the two or three  morphogens under consideration. These might,  for instance,  be  due to  changes of concentration of other morphogens acting in the role of catalyst or of fuel supply, or to a concurrent growth of the cells, or  a  change of  temperature.  Such changes are supposed ultimately to bring the system out of the stable  state. The  phenomena when the system is  just unstable were the particular subject of the inquiry.  I n  order to make the problem mathematically tractable it was necessary to assume that the system never deviated very far from the original homogeneous condition. This assumption was called the 'linearity assumption' because it permitted the replacement of the general reaction rate functions by linear ones. This linearity assumption is a serious one.  Its  justification  lies in the fact that the patterns produced in the early stages when it is valid  may be expected to have strong qualitative similarity to those prevailing in the later stages when it  is not. Other,  less important, assumptions were also made at the beginning of the mathematical theory, but the detailed effects of these were mostly considered in 5 9, and were qualitatively unimportant.

The conclusions reached were as follows. After the lapse of a certain period of time from the beginning of instability, a pattern of morphogen concentrations appears which can best be described in terms of 'waves'.  There are six types of possibility which may arise.

- (a)  The  equilibrium concentrations and reaction rates may become such that there would be instability for an isolated cell with the same content as any one of the cells of the ring.  If that cell drifts away from the equilibrium position, like an upright stick falling over, then, in the ring, each cell may be expected to do liltewise. I n   neighbouring cells the drift may be expected to be in the same direction, but in distant cells, e.g. at opposite ends of a diameter there is no reason to expect this to be so.

This is the least interesting of the cases.  It is possible, however, that it might account for ' dappled ' colour patterns, and an example of a pattern in two dimensions produced by this type of process is shown in figure 2 for comparison with 'dappling'.  If dappled patterns are to be explained in this way they must be laid down in a latent form when the foetus is only

a few inches long.  Later the distances would be greater than the morphogens could travel by diffusion.

( b ) This case is similar to  (a), except that the departure from equilibrium is not a unidirectional drift, but is oscillatory. As in case (a) there may not be agreement between the contents of cells at great distances.

There are probably many biological examples of this metabolic oscillation, but no really satisfactory one is known to the author.

(c)  There may be a drift from equilibrium, which is in opposite directions in contiguous cells.

No biological examples of this are known.

( d ) There is  a stationary wave pattern on the ring, with no time variation, apart from a slow increase in amplitude, i.e. the pattern is slowly becoming more marked.  I n   the case of a ring of continuous tissue the pattern is sinusoidal, i.e. the concentration of one of the morphogens plotted against position on the ring is a sine curve. The peaks of the waves will be uniformly spaced round the ring. The number of such peaks can be obtained approximately by dividing the  so-called ' chemical wave-length ' of the system into  the circuaiiference of  the  ring.  The chemical wave-length  is  given for  the case  of two  morphogens  by  the formula (9.3). This formula for the number of ~ e a k s of course does not give a whole number, but the actual number of peaks will always be one of the two whole numbers nearest to it, and will usually be the nearest. The degree of instability is also shown in (9.3).

The mathematical  conditions  under  which  this  case  applies  are  given  in  equations (9.4  a ) ,  (9.4  b) .

Biological examples of this case are discussed at some length below.

(e)' For a two-morphogen system only the alternatives  (a) to  (d) are possible, but with three or more morphogens it is possible to have travelling waves. With a ring there would be two sets of waves, one travelling clockwise and the other anticlockwise. There is a natural chemical wave-length and wave frequency in this case as well as a wave-length; no attempt was made to develop formulae for these.

I n  looking for  biological  examples of this  there is  no need  to consider only rings.  The waves could arise in a tissue of any anatomical form.  It is important to know what wavelengths, velocities and frequencies would be consistent with  the theory.  These quantities are determined by the rates at which the reactions occur (more accurately by the 'marginal reaction  rates', which  have the dimensions of the reciprocal of  a  time), and the diffusibilities of the morphogens. The possible range of values of the reaction rates is so immensely wide that they do not even give an indication of orders of magnitude.  The diffusibilities are more helpful.  If one were to assume that all the dimensionless parameters in a system of travelling waves were the same as in the example given in $8, one could say that the product of  the velocity  and  wave-length  of  the  waves  was 3 7 7 times  the  diffusibility of  the  most diffusible  morphogen.  But this assumption is certainly false, and it is by no means obvious what is the true range of possible values for the numerical constant (here 377). The movements of the tail of a  spermatozoon suggest themselves as an example of these travelling waves.  That the waves  are within  one cell  is  no  real  difficulty.  However,  the speed  of propagation seems to be somewhat greater than can be accounted  for except with a rather large numerical constant.

- ( f ) Metabolic  oscillation  with  neighbouring  cells  in  opposite  phases.  No  biological examples of this  are known to the author.

I t   is difficult also to find cases to which case (d)  applies directly, but this is simply because isolated rings of tissue are very rare.  O n  the other hand, systems that have the same kind of symmetry as a ring are extremely common, and it is to be expected that under appropriate chemical conditions, stationary waves may develop on these bodies, and that their circular symmetry will be replaced by a polygonal symmetry. Thus, for instance, a plant shoot may at one time have circular symmetry, i.e. appear essentially the same when rotated through any angle about a certain axis; this shoot may later develop a whorl of leaves, and then it will only suffer rotation through the angle which separates the leaves, or any multiple of it. This same example demonstrates  the  complexity  of  the situation  when  more  than  one dimension is involved. The  leaves on the shoots may not appear  in whorls, but be imbricated. This possibility is also capable of mathematical  analysis,  and will be considered in detail in a later paper. The cases which appear to the writer to come closest biologically  to the 'isolated ring of cells' are the tentacles of  (e.g.) Hydra, and the whorls of leaves of certain plants  such as Woodruff (Asperula odorata).

Hydra is something like a sea-anemone but lives in fresh water and has from about five to ten tentacles. A part of a Hydra cut off from the rest will rearrange itself so as to form a complete new organism. At one stage of this proceeding the organism has reached the form of a tube open at the head end and closed at the other end. The external diameter is somewhat greater at the head end than over  the rest of the tube. The whole still has circular symmetry.  At asomewhat later stage the symmetry has gone to the extent that  an  appropriate stain will bring out a number of patches on the widened head end. These patches arise at the points where the tentacles are subsequently to appear (Child 1941,p. 101and figure SO). According  to  morphogen  theory it is  natural to suppose  that  reactions,  similar  to  those which were considered in connection with the ring of tissue, take place in the widened head end, leading to a similar breakdown of symmetry. The situation is more complicated than the case of the thin isolated ring, for the portion of the Hydra concerned is neither isolated nor very thin.  It  is not unreasonable to suppose that this head region is the only one in which the chemical conditions are such as to give instability.  But  substances produced  in  this region are still free  to  diffuse  through  the surrounding region  of lesser  activity. There is no great difficulty  in  extending  the mathematics to cover  this  point  in particular  cases. But if the active region is too wide the system no longer approximates the behaviour  of a thin ring and one can no longer expect the tentacles to form a single whorl. This also cannot be considered in detail in the present paper.

I n  the case of woodruff the leaves appear in whorls on the stem,  the number of leaves in a whorl varying considerably, sometimes being as few as five or as many as nine. The numbers in consecutive whorls on the same stem are often equal, but by no means invariably.  It is  to be presumed  that the whorls originate in rings  of active tissue in the meristematic area, and that the rings arise at sufficiently great distance to have little influence on one another. The number of leaves in the whorl will presumably be obtainable by the rule given above, viz. by dividing the chemical wave-length into the circumference, though both  these  quantities  will  have  to  be  given  some  new  interpretation  more appropriate to  woodruff  than  to  the ring. Another  important  example  of  a structure with polygonal

symmetry is provided by young root fibres  just breaking out from the parent root.  Initially these are almost homogeneous in cross-section, but eventually a ring of fairly evenlly spaced spots appear,  and  these later  develop  into  vascular  strands.  In this  case again  the  full explanation must be in terms of a two-dimensional or even a three-dimensional problem, although the analysis for the ring is still illuminating. When the cross-section is very large the strands may be in more than one ring, or more or less randomly or hexagonally arranged. The  two-dimensional  theory  (not  expounded  here)  also  goes  a  long  way  to  explain this.

Flowers might appear superficially to provide the most obvious examples of polygonal symmetry, and it is probable that there are many species for which this 'waves round a ring7 theory is essentially correct.  But it is certain that it does not apply for all species.  If it did it would follow that, taking flowers as a whole, i.e. mixing up all species, there would be no very markedly preferred  petal (or corolla, segment, stamen, etc.) numbers.  For when all species are taken into account one must expect that the diameters of the rings concerned will take on nearly all values within a considerable range, and that neighbouring diameters will be almost equally common. There may also be some variation in chemical wavelength. Neighbouring values of the ratio circumferences to wave-length should therefore be more or less  equally frequent,  and this must  mean  that neighbouring petal numbers will have much the same  frequency. But this is not borne out by the facts.  The  number five is extremely common, and the number seven rather rare.  Such facts are, in the author's opinion, capable of explanation on the basis of morphogen theory, and are closely connected with the theory of phyllotaxis. They cannot be considered in detail here.

The case of a filament of tissue calls for some comment.  The equilibrium  patterns  on such a filament will be  the same as  on a ring, which has been cut  at a  point  where  the concentrations of the morphogens are a maximum or a minimum. This  could account for the segmentation ofsuch filaments. It  should be noticed, however, that the theory will not apply unmodified for filaments immersed in water.

## 12. CHEMICAL WAVES ON SPHEREs. GASTRULATION

The treatment of homogeneity breakdown on the surface of a sphere is not much more difficult than in the case of the ring. The theory of spherical harmonics, on which it is based, is  not,  however,  known  to  many  that  are  not  mathematical  specialists. Although  the essential properties of spherical harmonics that are used  are stated below,  many readers will prefer to proceed directly to the last paragraph of this section.

The anatomical structure concerned in  this problem  is  a hollow  sphere of comtinuous tissue such as a blastula.  It is supposed sufficiently thin that one can treat it as a 'spherical shell7.  This latter assumption is merely for the purpose of mathematical simplification; the results are almost exactly similar if it is omitted. As in 8  7 there are to be two morphogens, and a, b, c, d, ,LA', v', h, k  are also to have the same meaning as they did there. The operator V2 will  be  used  here  to  mean  the superficial part  of  the  Laplacian,  i.e.  V2V  will  be  an abbreviation of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 0 and yS  are spherical polar co-ordinates on the surface of the sphere and p is its radius. The equations corresponding to (7.1) may then be written

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

I t   is well known (e.g.  Jeans 1927, chapter 8) that any function on the surface of the sphere, or at least any that is likely to arise in a physical problem,  can be 'expanded in spherical surface harmonics'. This means that it can be expressed in the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The expression in the square bracket is described as a 'surface harmonic of degree n'.  Its nearest  analogue in the ring theory is  a  Fourier component.  The essential property of a spherical harmonic of degree n is that when the operator V2 is applied to it the effect is the same as multiplication  by  -n(n$1)/p2. In view of this fact it is evident that a solution of (12-1) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where q, and ql, are the two roots of and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is the most general solution, since the coefficients Ak and B; can be chosen to give any required values of X, Y when t -0, except when (12.3) has two equal roots, in which case a treatment is required which is similar to that applied in similar circumstances in $7. The analogy with f j  7 throughout  will indeed be obvious,  though the summation with respect to m  does not appear there. The meaning of this summation is that there are a number of different  patterns  with  the  same  wave-length,  which  can  be  superposed  with  various amplitude factors. Then supposing that, as in  S 8, one particular wave-length predominates, (12.2) reduces to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

I n  other words,  the concentrations of the two morphogens are proportional,  and both of them are surface harmonics of the same degree no, viz. that which makes the greater of the roots qno, qi,, have the greatest value.

I t  is  probable  that the forms of various  nearly spherical structures, such as radiolarian skeletons,  are closely  related  to  these  spherical  harmonic  patterns.  The most  important application of the theory seems, however, to be to the gastrulation of a blastula.  Suppose that the chemical data, including the chemical wave-length, remain constant as the radius of the blastula increases. To be quite specific suppose that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With these values the system is quite stable so long as the radius is less than about 2.  Near this point, however, the harmonics of degree 1begin to develop and a pattern of form (12.5) with no = 1makes its appearance. Making use of the facts that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

it is seen that Xh is of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which may also be interpreted as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 8' is the angle which the radius 8, # makes with the-fixed direction having direction cosines proportional to B, C, A and A' = J(A2  +B2 + C2).

The outcome  of  the  analysis  therefore  is  quite  simply  this. Under  certain  riot  very restrictive conditions  (which include a requirement that the sphere be relatively srnall but increasing in size) the pattern of the breakdown of homogeneity is axially symmetrical, not about the original axis of spherical polar co-ordinates, but about some new axis determined by the disturbing influences. The concentrations of the first morphogen are given by (12.7), where 8' is measured from this new axis; and Y-k is proportional to X-h. Supposing that the first morphogen is, or encourages the production of, a growth hormone, one must expect the blastula to grow in an axially symmetric manner, but at a greater rate at one end of the axis than at the other This might under many circumstances lead .to gastrulation,  though the effects  of  such growth are not very easily determinable. They depend  on the elastic properties of the tissue as well as on the  growth rate at each point. This growth will certainly lead  to  a  solid  of revolution  with  a  marked  difference between  the two  poles,  unless,  in addition to the chemical instability, there is a mechanical instability causing the breakdown of axial symmetry. The direction of the axis of gastrulation will be quite random according to this theory.  It may be that it is found experimentally that the axis is normally in some definite direction such as that of the animal pole. This is not essentially contradictory to the theory, for any small asymmetry of the zygote may be sufficient to provide the ' disturbance ' which determines the axis.

## 13. NON-LINEAR THEORY. USE OF DIGITAL COMPUTERS

The 'wave'  theory which has been developed here depends essentially on the assumption that the reaction  rates are linear functions of the concentrations, an assumption which is justifiable in the case of a system just  beginning to leave a homogeneous condition.  Such systems certainly have a special interest as giving the first appearance of a pattern, but they are the exception rather than the rule.  Most of an  organism, most of'the  time, is developing

## 72 A.  M.  TURING  ON THE CHEMICAL  BASIS  OF MORPHOGENESIS

from one pattern  into another, rather than from homogeneity into a pattern.  One would like to be able to follow this more general process mathematically also. The difficulties are, however, such that one cannot hope to have any very embracing tlzeory of such processes, beyond  the statement of the equations.  It might be possible, however, to treat a few particular cases in detail with the aid of a digital computer. This method  has the advantage that  it  is  not  so  necessary  to  make  simplifying  assunlptions  as  it  is  whcn  doing  a  more theoretical type of analysis.  It might even be possible to take the mechanical aspects of the problem  into account as well as the chemical,  when  applying this  type of method.  The essential disadvantage of the method is  that one only gets results for particular  cases.  But this  disadvantage  is  probably  of  comparatively  little  importance. Even  with  the  ring problem, considered in this paper, for which a reasonably complete mathematical analysis was possible, the computational treatment of a particular case was most illuminating. The morphogen theory of phyllotaxis, to be described, as already mentioned, in a later paper, will be covered by this computational method.  Non-linear equations will be used.

It must  be admitted that the biological  examples which it has been possible to give in the present  paper  are very  limited.  This  can  be  ascribed  quite simply  to  the fact  that biological  phenomena are usually very complicated. Taking this in combination with the relatively  elementary mathematics used in this paper one could hardly expect to find that many observed biological  phenomena would  be covered.  It is thought, however, that the imaginary biological systems which have been treated, and the principles which have been discussed, should be of some help in interpreting real biological forms.

## REFERENCES

Child,  C.  M. 1941  Patterns and problems o f development.  University  of Chicago Press.

Davson, H. &amp; Danielli, J.  F. 1943  The permeability o f natural membranes.  Cambridge University Press. Jeans,  J. H. 1927 The mathematical theory  o f elasticity  and magnetism,  5th ed.  Cambridge University Press.

Michaelis, L. &amp; Menten, A/I. L.  1913  Die Kinetik der Invertinwirkung.  Biochem. 2. 49, 333. Thompson, Sir D'Arcy 1942  O n   growth  andform, 2nd ed.  Cambridge University  Press. Waddington, C. H.  1940  Organisers and genes. Cambridge University  Press.
