-

<!-- image -->

## TOWARD A MATHEMATICAL SEMANTICS FOR COMPUTER  LANGUAGES

## by Dana Scott and

Christopher Strachey

Oxford  University Computing  Laboratory Programming  Research  Group-Library 8-11  Keble  Road Oxford  OX,  3QD Oxford  (0865)  54141

Oxford University Computing Laboratory Programming Research Group

":.\

'

"';'

""",

<!-- image -->

## OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  COMPUTING  LABORATORY PROGRAMMING  RESEARCH  GROUP 4S  BANBURY  ROAD

..

## OXFORD

~

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## TOWARD  A ~ATHEMATICAL SEMANTICS FOR COMPUTER  LANGUAGES

by

Dana  Scott Princeton  University and

Christopher  Strachey Oxford  University

Technical  Monograph  PRG-6 August  1971

Oxford  University  Computing  Laboratory. Programming  Research  Group, 45  Banbury  Road, Oxford.

-

<!-- image -->

~ 1971 Dana  Scott  and  Christopher  Strachey

Department  of  Philosophy, 1879  lIall, Princeton  University, Princeton.  New  Jersey  08540.

Oxford  University  Computing  Laboratory. Programming  Research Group. 45  Banbury  Road. Oxford  OX2 6PE.

This  pape r is  also  to  appear  in Fl'(.'ceedinBs  0;the .';y-,;;;o:illT::  on  ComputeT's  and  AutoJ7'ata. lo-licroloo'ave Research  Institute Symposia  Series  Volume  21.  Polytechnic  Institute  of Brooklyn. and  appears  as  a  Technical  Monograph  by  special  aJ"rangement  ...·ith the  publishers.

RefeJ"~nces in  the  Ii terature  should  be:made  to  the \_"!'OL·,-,',~;r:gs, as the texts  are  identical  and  the  Symposia  Sl?ries is  gcaerally  available  in  libraries.

## ABSTRACT

Compilers  for  high-level  languages aTe generally  constructed to  give  the complete  translation  of  the  programs  into  machme language. As machines  merely  juggle  bit  patterns,  the  concepts of  the  original  language  may  be  lost  or  at  least  obscured  during this  passage. The  purpose  of  a  mathematical  semantics  is  to  give a  correct  and  meaningful  correspondence  between  programs  and mathematical  entities  in  a  way  that  is  entirely  independent  of  an implementation. This  plan  is  illustrated  in  a  very  elementary way  in  the  introduction. The  first  section  connects  the  general method  wi th  the  usual  idea  of  state  transformations. The  next section  shows  why the  mathematics  of  functions  has  to  be  modified to  accommodate  recursive  commands. Section  3  explains  the  modifi­ cation. Section  4  introduces  the  environments  for  handling  variables and  identifiers  and  shows  how the  semantical  equations  define equivalence  of  programs. Section  5  gives  an  exposition  of  the  new type  of  mathematical  function  spaces  that  are  required  fOl  the semantics  of  procedures  when  these  are  allowed  in  assignment  state­ ments. The  conclusion  traces  some  of  the  background  of  the  project and  points  the  way  to  future  work.

## CONTENTS

|            |                              | Page   |
|------------|------------------------------|--------|
| O.         | Introduction                 | 1      |
| L          | States and Commands          | 7      |
| 2.         | Recursion                    | lS     |
| 3.         | Lattices and Fixed Points    | 20     |
| 4.         | Identifiers and Environments | 26     |
| S.         | Procedures                   | 30     |
| 6.         | Conclusion                   | 39     |
| References | References                   | 42     |

## TOWARD  A MATHEMATICAL  SEMANTICS FOR COMPUTER  LANGUAGES

O. INTRODUCTION. The idea  of  a mathematical. semantics  fOT  a language  is  perfectly  well  illustrated  by  the  contrast  between numerals on  the  one  hand  and nu.mber8 on  the  other. The  nwnerals are expressions in  a  certain  familiar  language; while  the  numbers are  mathematical objects (abstract  objects)  which  provide  the intended interpretations of  the  expressions. We need  the  ex· pressions  to  be  able  to  communicate  the  results  of  OUT theOTizings about  the  numbers,  but  the  symbols  themselves  should  not  be  con­ fused  with  the  concepts  they  denote. For  one  thing,  there  are many differen t languages  adequate  for  conveying  the same concepts (e.g.  binary, octal,  or  decimal  numerals). For  another.  even  in the same language  many  different  expressions  can  denote  the same concepts (e.g. 2+2, ~. 1+(1+(1+1)).  etc.), The  problem  of ex~ plaining  these equiva!enr!es of  expressions (whether  in  the  same or  different  languages)  is  one  of  the  tasks  of  semantics  and  is much  too  important  to  be left  to  syntax  alone. Besides,  the mathematical  concepts  are  required  for  the proof that  the  "arious equivalences  have  been correctly described.

In  more detail  ..e may consider  the  follo\f&gt;'lng  explicit syntax  for  binary  numerals:

NUMERALS

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here  we have  used  the  Greek  letter  v  as a metavG"t'iable over  the syntactical  category  of  numerals,  and  the  category given  a l'e!oursive  definition in  the  usual  way. Thus,  a  numeral is  either  one  of  the  digi ts  0 or  1  or  is  the  Tcsul t of  suffixing one  of  these  digits  to  a  previously  obtained  numeral. Let the itself  is  being set  of  all  numerals  be called  Nml for  short.

Semantically  speaking  each  of  the  numerals is  meant to denote  a  unique  number. Let  N  be  the  set  of  numbers. (The elements  of  Nml are  expressions; while  the  elements  of  N  are mathematical  objects  conceived  in  austraction  independently  of not&lt;ltion.) The  obvious  principle  of  interpretation  provides  a function, the evaluation  mapping, which  we might  call  \J', and which  has  the  functional  character:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus  for  each v E  Nml, the  function  value

"'! vI

7;6 the  number  denoted  by v.

How  is  the  evaluation  function "determined'? Inasmuch  as it  is to  be defined  on  a recursively  defined  set  Nml. it  is  reason­ able  that '\J should  itself be  g-iven  a  recursive  definition. Indeed by  following  exactly  the  four  clauses  of  the  recursive  definition  Nml, we  are  motivated  by  our  understanding  of  numerals to  write:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here on the  left-hand  side  of  the  equations,  t.t  is  heing  applied to  expressions; while  on the ri~ht-hand side  the To  borro\f&gt;' the  relevant termlnolo~y flam  logic,  the  numerical  ex­

values  arc  given.

the pressions  belong  to the  obJect ~angu.age; whereas  the  definition of  1J  is  given  in  the metalaTlguage. To  be  able to  write  down  ex­ plicitly  the  definition  of \.1", some  metalinguistic  symbolization is  of  course  required. The  metalinguistic  expressions  must  at all  cost  be  distinguished  from  those  in  the  object  language. (We have  put the  object  language  0  and  1 in  Roman  type-face  and metalanguage 0.1,2 1n italics. Logicians  often  take  further pre­ cautions by enclosing  the  object  language  expressions  in  quotes; the  quotation- express ions  can  then  be  regarded  as  part  of  the metalanguage. and  thus the  languages  are  "insulated"  from  one another. In this  paper,  however,  our  object  languages  are simple  enough making  the  use  of  such  devices  less  critical. The separation  needs  to  be  observed  nevertheless,  and  in  the  semantic equations  we have  enclosed  the  object  language  expressions  in  the special  brackets  ( I merely  as  an  aid  to  the  eye.)

Granted  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  symbol  and object,  it  may still  seem  that  the  above  equations  for  l1"are circular  or  nearly  vacuous  in  content. Such  a conclusion  is wrong,  however, because  there  is  an  easily  appreciated  point  to the  definition: namely,  the  explication  of  the positional  '7otation. In  our  metalanguage  we need  never  have  heard  of  decimals  or  binaries. We do  require, though,  the  concept  of 'lumber, the  concepts  of J3el'O and one, the  concepts  of addit'io'l and multiplication. (By  defin­ ition  2=1+1, say,  and  if we  want, the  whole theory of  numbers could  be  conveyed  in  the  metalanguage  with  the  help  of Roman 'lumerals augmented  wi th  a few tricks  from  algebra  such  as the  use of operation  symbols and variables.) These  concepts,  fundamental as they  are, cannot  be  strictly  said  to -impl)j the  positional notation. In fact, the  clever  use of  0 to  help  form  strings  of digits  was a discovery L"l language. This  discovery  in  no  way changed  the  abstract  nature  of  number,  but  it  was a tremendous help  in  popularizing  the  use  of  arithmetic  ideas ~ and  there  seems to  be  a  perfectly  good  parallel  here  with  computer  languages  many of  which  contain  in  their  syntactical  structures  quite  as  clever discoveries  of  language.

One  point  that  encourages  confusion  in  thinking  about numbers  is  the  possibility  of  having  a complete and canonical naming  system  for  them. ]n  the  illustrative  syntax fOT  binary numerals  we  have  been  considering,such  strings  as  001101  were allowed. As  everyone  knows the  initial  run  of  o's  is  unnecessary for  we  can  show  that

## "gOOllOl]  ='\)(11011 = Xill.

This  type  of  straight-forward  deletion  gives  us the  only  possible equivalences  in  this  very  simple  language. The Nduced numerals (Le"numerals  of  the  forms  0  and  1\.1, where \.I E Nml is  arbitrary) are  then  in  a one-one  correspondence  wi th  the  numbe rs. We can then ~ork exclusively  with  these  normal  forms. and  it  is  so  easy to  think  of  these  expressions  as being the  numbers -especially if  one  is  familiar  with  only  one  notational  system. The  attitude is  wrong-headed,  however. But  for  many  activi ties there  may  be no  real  harm,  since  the  confused  mind  will  give  the same  answers as the  clear-headed  person. The  notationally  bound  thinker  may often  be  distinguished  by  the  way  he  feels  that  he has  to  specify all  his  operations  by  algorithmic  symbol  manipulations (as in digitwise  addition  of  numerals). Again  there  may be  no  real harm  in  this  if  the  algorithms  are  correctly  given. And  in  the case  of  numbers  the  two  approaches  can  be  brought  together  (the symbolic  and  the  conceptual),  for  our  system  of  reduced  numerals can,  by  a slight  amount  of  good  will,  be  regarded  as  a model for number  theory. Since  we know  that all such  models are  isomorphic, there  is  not  much  mathematical  advantage  in  using  one  model  over another. This  is a sense  in  which  numbers  can  be consistently  con­ fused  with  numerals. But  the  confusion  does  not really  do  us  any good  either.

The  reasons  why  the  number/numeral  confusion  should  be avoided  are  many. For  one  reason,  we  may  turn  the  isomorphism argument  the  other  way  round: If  all  models  of  number  theory  are isomorphic,  you  may not want to  single  out  a  pu:-ticular  one  at  all. Because  the  semantical  ideas  will  equally  well  apply  to  all  of  them. you  may  want  to  leave  open  the  possibility  of shiFting from  one  to another. This is  somewhat  analogous  in  computer language  sewant ics

to allo~ing different  representations  to  be  used  in  different machines  to  implement  the  same  language (in  hopefully  isomorphic ... ays). In  the case  of  numbers  not  much  advantage  is  bought by this  freedom.  but  any  attitude  of  restricting  generality  is  a bad  habi t which  can  be  misleading  in  analogous  but mOTe complicated situations.

A  mOTe important  reason  fOT  not  getting  into  this  hahi t comes to  the  fOre  when  one  realizes  that  fOT  some  systems  of mathematical  concepts  no  fully  adequate  notational  system  is possible: the real  numbers  are  the  prime  example. Of  coune  it will  be  objected  that  this  realm  of  mathematics  is  much  too  abstract, much  too  infinitary.  much  too  distant  from  real-life  computation. This  objection  cannot  stand  careful  conceptual  investigation,  but a full  answer  would  take  us too  far  from  the  topic  of  this  papeL A  quite  adequate  answer  concerns  not  the  mathematically  very pure  structures  such  as  the  real  numbers,  but  rather  our  theories of  classes  of  similar  but  different  structures. That is  to  say. for  the  semantic  investigation  of  certain  language  features  it may  not  be  appropriate  to  single  out  one (isomorphism  type  of) structure,  but  for  many  reasons  generali ty, lack  of  knowledge, for  the  sake  of  experiment  we may  want the same semantica] equations  to  be  employed  OVer  the whole  class of  structures. Since the  structures  need  no  longer  be  isomorphic,  different  structures may  lead  to  quite  different  normal  forms  for  expressions. (The mathe\_matical  theory  of  groups. for  instance.  could  provide  us innumerable  such  examples.) Hence.  no  one  system  of  "numerals" would  any  longer  suffice. Even  if  the  separate  structures could somehow  each  be  symbolically  constructed,  the  effort  would  be beside  the  point: what  we are  trying  to  get  at  are  the C'o~mon features of  the  structures. The  various ad  hoc details  would only  detract  from  this  higher  purpose.

To  bring  this  introductory  sermon  to  a close: the  point of OUT approach  is  to  allow  a  proper  balance  between  rigorous  formul­ ation.  generality  of  application,  and  conceptual  simplicity. One essential  achievement  of  the  method  we shall  wish  to  claim  is  that

by  insisting  on  a suitable  level  of  abstraction  and  by  emphasizing the  right  details  we are  going  to  hit  squarely  what  can  be  called the mathematical  meaning  of  a language. In  the  trivial  example of  the  binary  numerals  discussed  above  everyone  will agree  that the  evaluation  function  1J  is  indeed  correctly  defined. That  much is  obvious. Note,  however, that  having  accepted  this  fact,  it  is then  possible  to prove that  certain  numerical  algori thms  are correct (digitwise  addition,  say).  and  before  we had  the  definition  this question  did  not  even  make  sense. (Specifically,  digitwise addi tion  is  an  operation \)0 Q;I VI defined  on  numerals vo. \),  . What  one  needs to  prove  is  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

wi th  symbolic  addi tion  on  the  left  and  conceptual  addition  on  the right. It is  not  difficult  to  do  this,  but  one  needs  an  indnctive argument.) These  are  simple  p-oirrts. but  it  is  easy to  lose  sight of  them  when  the  languages  get  involved.

1. STATES  AND COMMANDS We begin by postulating  that  the  inter­ pretation  of  the  language  depends  on the states of  "the  system". That  is  to  say. computer  oriented  languages  differ  from  their math· ematical  counterparts  by  virtue  of  their dynamic character. An expression  doeS not  generally  possess one uniquely  determined  value of  the  expected  sort,  but  rather  the  value  depends  upon  the  state of  the  system  at  the  time  of  initialization  of  evaluation. What increases  the dynamic  character  of  the  evaluation  process  is the fact  that  the act  of  evaluation  may  very  well  alter  the  initial state. Thus the  working  out  of  a compound  expression  can  require several  changes of  state.  and  the  treatment  of  a  5ubexpression generally  has to  wait  for  the  moment  at  which  the  state  can  be provided  appropriate  to  its  evaluation. Therefore  the  "algebra" of  equivalences  of  such  expressions  need  not  be  as  "beautiful" as  the  well-known  mathematical  examples. This  does  not  mean that the  semantics of  such  languages  will  be Zess mathematical,  only an  order  more complex.

Part  of  our  assumption  is  that  the  states  of  the  system form  a set 5. and  the  dynamic  character  of  the  language  wil1  require us to  consider tl'ansformations of  this  5  into  itself: the  state transformations. For  the  moment  let  us  write (in  our  metalanguage)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  the  set  of aZZ state  transformations  (this  set  may  require restriction  later). Bya tl'ansfol'mation f E [5 -&gt;-5]  we understand the  ordinary  concept  of  a  mathematical function defined  on  S  with values  in  5. Functions  in  the  mathematical  sense  are  abstract objects  they  can  be defined in  various  linguistic  forms,  but after  the  definition  is  interpreted  all  that  is  left  is  the  bare correspondenae between arguments a  E 5 and values  fro) E  5. In particular  two  functions  which  assume  the  same  values  for  the  same arguments  are  mathematically  identical  even  though  they  might  have been  defined  in  some  object  language  in  quite  different  ways.

The  simplest  way  to  regard  the  state  transformations  from a to f(oJ is that  they  give  the  results  of  executing  a com~lnd. No  explicit  values  are  required; one  is  merely  being  asked  to "move along". Of  course  certain  "values"  may  be implici t  in  a.

and  they may be  changed  in  passing  to  [(0) (e.g.  ones position). The  command, however,  is  concerned  more  with  the  overall  change; other  hnds  of  expressions  can  be  used  to  extract  from  a  state dES any  relevant  values. But  one  syntactic  category  in  our language  will  be  that  of  commands; let  us  call  the  set  of  these expressions Cmd, Given  Y E Cmd, no  matter  how camp lex, the mathematical  meaning  of  this  expression  is  an  associ ated  state transformationtlYI E [5 -+ SJ, That  is,  the  semantics  of  commands is  to  provide  us  with  a  mapping:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

just  as the  semantics  of  numerals  gave  us:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

What  is  vague  here  is  that  we have  no  idea  what commands  are, whereas  numerals  were  standard. - That  we  have  at  this  stage  no idea  what  states  0 E S  are  is  far  less  serious.  because  that  is the  part  of  the  interpretation  we are  on  purpose  leaving  open.

It  is  not  difficult  to  be  more  explicit  about  the  syntax of  cOITlJllands. however.  because  there  are  several  qui te  natural  ways of  combining  them. An initial  syntax  might  look  as  follows:

## COMMANDS

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here  the  Greek  letter  y  is  a  metavariable  over  the category  (Cmd) which  is  being  given  a recursive  definition. On  the  right-hand side  of  the  definition  the y.yo .y, can  be  regarded  as pre-lJiously obtained  commands.  where  the  subscripts  are  required  in  a  binary composition  to  allow  for different commands to  be  chosen. If  in one  clause  of  the  definition  the same "'(  appeared  twice.  we  would intend  that  the  same  previously  obtained  expression  be  used  in both positions. There  is  no  implied  connection  between  the  y's in  the  separate  clauses. The letters  ¢ and E: are meant  to  refer to  other  syntactic  categories  yet  to  be  explained. The  expression dummy  i-s a COTl8tant command  (an  "atomic"  command  expression).

As anyone  can  see (assuming  that  the  categories  of  ¢ and

E

are  simple) the  set  Cmd is  going  to  be  a  context-free  language. Also  obvious is  the  fact  that  the  language  is ambiguous -thus yo  ;)'1 ;y~ can be  parsed  in  two  different  ways at  least. Machines generally  prefer  their  languages unambiguou.s; while  humans  enjoy a little  uncertainty,  or  at  least  they  find  ways  to  overlook ambigui ties  by  giving  each  other  the  benefit  of  the  doubt. Some­ times  ambiguities  make  no  difference  (as  in  Yo  ;"(,  ;)'1).  but  at other  times  they  are  quite  tiresome (as in  e: -&gt;-)'0,"(1;"(2). \lie shall  deal  with  this  problem  presently,  but  in  the  meantime  note the  clause  (Y) in  the  definition. This  clause  allows  us to  form (e: -+ Yo  ,)'1) ;Y~ or  (: .... Yo  ,(Y j ;)'2)  which  are  similar  to  the  ambiguous expression  but  which  have  one  chance  less  of  being  ambiguom. With  a sufficient  nesting  of  parentheses  all  ambiguity  can  be eliminated; or,  speaking  more  precisely,  there  is  a  completely unambiguous  sublanguage  of  Cmd. The  only  trouble  with  us  humans is  that  the  majority  find  writing  in  this  sublanguagc  a terrific bore; hence the  tendency  to  the  more  dangerous  syntax.

Before  we can  be  more  precise  about  Cmd  and  the  inter­ pretation e. we  have  to  discuss  the  £. For  the  time  being E E  Exp, the  class  of BooZean  ezpr'essions (we shall  allow  other  types  of expressions  later). As a starter  at  a  syntax  we can  write:

## EXPRESSIONS

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  same  remarks  about  ambiguity  apply. The 11" are  certain  atomic expressi ons  which  we shall  not  stop  to  detail  now. The  Boolean expressions true  and  false  are  constants,and  Eo .... £1  ,£2 is  the well-known  conditional  expression  (short  for: if  £0 then  £1 else  £2, which  some  rr:ay  prefer).

false

What of  interpretation? In  the  first  place  we  postUlate the  set  T of truth  values which  contains  the  elements true and corresponding  to  true  and  false. But  the  meaning  &amp;[E] is  not going  to  be simply  an  element  of  T, for  in  general  values must depend  on  states. Besides  this  evaluation  may cause a change  of state. Thus  the  correct  functional  character  of  &amp; is:

where where

forallaEA.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This  means that  given  £: E Exp and  0  E

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S.  then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where t E T is  the  value  of  E given  0, and  0'  is  the  resultant state after  the  evaluation and  may  differ  from a as  it may  have been  changed  by  the  evaluation. (Here  T  x  S  is  the  usual cartesian product of  sets  and &lt;, ," &gt; is  the pairing function.)

r:

Before  giving  the  clauses  that  define and  S, it  is  useful to  introduce  several  mathematical  operations  on  functions. If f : B -&gt;C  and 9 : A  .... B, then  as  usual  we  write feg : A + C  fOT the composition. where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  all  cr.  EA. We  have  further

p

A - [B  + [A x BJJ

M.

A x B .... A, and

M, A x B  .... B.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  all (J, E A, S  E B. Finally,  if p : A'  -&gt;[8 + CJ and q : A .... A' x B. then p *q : A  -&gt;C.  where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  all  a Ii: A. On  all  of  these  operations  and  special  functions we ought to  write  some  kind  of  ABC subscripts,  because  strictly speaking  they  depend  on the  choice  of  the  various sets; we  have omitted  these  subscripts  as they  can  easily  be  deduced  from  the context. The  same  goes  for  the identity function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Turning  now  to  the  mapping ~ we  have  clause  by  clause:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

because  parentheses  add  nothing  to  meaning.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

because  each  atomic  expression  11 must"have  a  given  meaning. (Which meaning  this is.  need  not  concern  us  here,  since  at  the  moment all ... ·e  consider  is  the fopm of  the  semantic  definition.)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

blO'cause true and  false  are  constants  which  can  be  evaluated "instan­ taneously"  wi thou!  change  of  state. This  means that  fOT all  o.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the  function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  such  that so  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  all  el ,el  .t,o in  appropriate  sets.

It is  now  possible  to  give  the  clauses  of  the  definition oft; , t: I  (Y)I ~ &lt;:[Yi.

elrjlJ = (some  given 5  .... $),

~[dummy) '" I.

t::1£ .... Yo ,rd  = CondCC[YoLQ:yd)*&amp;IEL

ei Yll ; YI  I = e hi ~ ot'[Yo] ·

These  functional  equations  can  all  be  read  in  words: t"[ (y)] is of  course  the  same as t'~yl. Nextt'iH  is  a  given  state  .trans­ formation, since ¢I is  taken  for  the  moment as a primitive  (or atomic)  command. (Later  we could  introduce  some  syntax  for the  category  of iP if 'We  wished,  and  this  would  requi re  further semantic  equations  of  a  similar  sort.) The dummy·comman.d is next  being  interpreted  as  the  "do  nothing"  transformation. The conditional- command on  the  other  hand requi res  a cond it  ional operator  similar  to  the  one  used  for  expressions, except  that  the domain  of  definition  is  altered  to  make  it  appropriate  to  commands.

Specifically  we  have:

Cond [S ~ SJ x [S + 5] + [T + [S + SJ].

Some  subscripts  ought  to  be introduced  to  indicate  the  difference between  the  t",o  kinds  of  Cond-functions,  but  "'e  are relying  on the  context  to  make this  clear. Finally  Yo  ;Y, is  be ing  interpreted as the sequencing operation  on  commands,  "'hich  in  terms  of  state transformations  is  simply  the composition  of  functions. Note, however, the  order  of  application. The  "positional  notation" of  the  command  language  conventionally  places  the  first  command  to be  executed  on  the  left  and  the  follo'Wing  one  on  the  right. The convention  "'ith mathematical  composition  of  functions  is  just  the opposite. (The reason  being  the  common  use  of f{x) rather  than xf for  the  function-value  notation.)

In format  these  equations  forl:'and8.  are  not  much  different from  those  for  11  as app lied  to  the  numerals. Ir.  all  cases  there is  a  syntactical  defini tioo  in  several  clauses. The  semantical definition  is  "syntax-directed"  in  that  it  follows the  same  order of  clauses  and  transforms  each  language  construct  into  the  in­ tended  operation  on the  meanings  of  the  parts. In  the  case  of numerals  the  meanings  were  familiar  mathematical  objects  on  which many  familiar  operations (addition,  mUltiplication,  etc.)  were already  defined. In  the  case  of  commands  and  Boolean  expressions, the  values  ",ere  not  so  well  known,  nor  were  the  operations (such as Cond) very  common. Nevertheless.  the  domains [S  ... SJ  and [S  ...  T )( S] are  quite  appropriate  to  the  ideas  that  are  being

explained,  and the  various  operations (Q,*,P,M·· M,) are  natural ones  for  these domains.

That  it  is  necessary  to  construct  meanings  out  of fuwtions ([5'" S]) may seem bothersome,  but  it  should  not  be  deplored. After  all  the idea  of  function  is  one  of  the  greatest  of  OUT mathematical  discoveries. The  Calculus  would  be  impossible with­ out  functions. and  the  development  of  the  subject  would  be un­ thinkable  without  the  use  of  various  operators (derivative,  in­ tegral,  etc.) and  consideration  of  the  equations  involving  them. Though  formal languages  are  not  generally  made  explicit,  still there  is  constant  translation  from  intuitive  ideas  to  mathematical concepts (veloC!ity means  derivative, area means  integral,  super­ position means addition  of  functions.  and  so  on). In  the  case  of computer  languages  we cannot  say  yet  that  we  have  introduced  con­ cepts  anywhere near  as  important  as  those  of  the  Calculus,  but the spirit of  mathematizing  ideas  can  and  ought  to  be  carriM over. That  the  project is a  useful  activity  remains  to  be demonstrated,  but  the  treatment  of r'eeul'sion  in the  next  section ought  to  indicate  some  of  the  advantages  of  the  mathematical approach.

Before  turning  to  more  important  concepts.  the  question of ambiguity must  be  faced  again. We have  allowed  our  grammars to  be  ambiguous,  and  so  strictly  speaking  the  semantical  mappings t: and  6. are  not  well  defined. (,,"on Nml was  well  defined  because that  graIllJnar  was  not  a-mbi-guous.) Is  there  a  mistake  here? We\_ think  not. Our  attitude  is  that  the  meaning  of  an  expression depends  on  the  way  it  is  parsed. From  this  point  of  view  the mappings e  and  6. are  defined not on  expressions simpLieite-r but rather  on  the annotated deduetion  trees for  expressions  based  on rules  of  the grammar. (If  one  wishes  a linear  notation,  a  fUlly bracketed  language  could  be  introduced  in  the  usual  way, alld  then the  expressions  we  have  written  above  would  result  by  deletion of  the  brackets  and  subscripts.) As  emphasized  above  these brackets (or  trees)  are  intolerable  to  wri te; hence.  as long as we keep  our  semantic  equations  "in  step"  with  the  syntactical  defini­

tions  and  warn  the  reader  of  the oYeTsimplification~ it  will  be clear  Io'hat  is  intended  without  the  burden  of  any  more  notation. (In  the  terminology  of  Knuth {2. 3] we are  still  using  only synthesized attributes  in  assigning  meanings  to  expressions. Whether  the inhel'ited-attr-ibute approach  is  convenient  is  some­ thing we  must  consider  further,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  Knuth's way  of  introducing  both  bottom-up  and  top-down  dependencies  between semantic  equations  is  an  interesting  notion. Be  that  as  it  may. the  point  of  OUT  paper  is  the  study  of liIhat it  is  that  semantic equations  assign  to  expressions. The path by  which  the  assignment is  made is  at  the  moment  a  secondary  issue.)

2. RECURSION. The language  of  commands  and  expressions  as  intro­ duced  in  the last  section  is  at  best  of  illustrative  value. It was  useful to  see  in  not too  horrible  detail  the  connections between  the  syntactical  and  semantical  equations. But  the  actual language  used  was  of  very  limited  expressive  power. The  command structure  ,,"as of  a very direct sort: the  execution  of  such  a cOl'lmand would  procede along  a "branch"  of  a tl'ee, the  commands being composed in sequence  and  the  choice  of  path  at  a branch  paint being  decided  by  evaluation  of  a  conditional  expression. In  Scott
- [6] the  expressive  power  of  such  a language  was  exprrnded  by the introduction  of  a certain  kind  of ilifiY!ite tree,  I:!ut the  mathematics of  this  approach  loIould  take  us too  far  afield  here. And in any case. it  is  rather  fully  explained  in  that  paper. Our  interest here  lies  in  more  conventional  language  features; in  particular those  that  can  be  written  down  in  finite  space. This  doe$  not mean  that  thinking  of  finite  expressions  as  being  "unrolled"  into infinite  trees  might  not  be  mathematically  illuminating,  rather  we do  not  have the  time  to  discuss  it  in  this  paper.

The question  that  leads  to  infinite  trees  is  of  COurse that of recursive ly  defirted commands. By  loIay  of  example  suppose  that exit  is  a  primitive  command. as is  fudge. Moreover,  suppose  that test  is  a  primitive  Boolean  expression. One  would  wish  then  to introduce  a command loop by  the  equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

-

In  other  words.  to  loop  means to  alternate  testing  and  fudging until  a  negative  test  is  produced. At that  moment  a  hasty  exit is  then  required  without further  fudging. This  is  one  of  the simplest  and  most  familiar  examples. More generally  it ""ill  be desired  to  introduce  a  whole sequertce of  interrelated  cOTMands ~OI~l""'~n-l by  a  system  of  eqnations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  we may think  of ~o as the principal command to  be  executed and  the  remaining ~i as auxiliary commands  introduced  to  aid  the definition. Now the  Y .  command  exprE'ssions loIill  involve  reference J

to  the ~i commands, just  as in  the loop example. Sometimes  it  is possible  to  eliminate  the  auxiliary  commands  at  the  expense  of perspicuity by substitution  of  one  equation  in  another. But  at other  times the  elimination  is  not  possible  or  not  at  all  obvious. In  any  case  it  is  a  language  feature  of  well-known  convenience  to allow  simultaneous  equations. All  of  this  is  very  familiar  ground.

Syntactically,  to  accommodate  this  recursive style  of conunand  definition.  we must  expand  the  language  to  allow  for  (temp­ orary) identifiers which  will  refer  to  these  auxiliary  commands, the  precise  reference  being  controlled by a  scheme  of dli.~Z.al'ation. The  exact  style  of  identifiers  need  not  concern  us  here: all  we require  is  a  syntactical  category  Id  of  expressions  distinct  from the  other  kinds  of  expressions  mentioned  so  far. Besides  this  Id should be  infinite  to  allow  for  as  many  auxiliaries as  we  please. We use  the  Greek r, to  range  ;ver  Id.

Having  provided  identifiers,  we then  need  to  combine  them wi th  other  command  express ions. Of  course  an  iden t  i fier  standing alone  will  be  allowed  in  the  expanded  Cmd. In  this  way  identifiers can  be  included  in  the  interiors  of  commands. Further  the  system of  equations  indicated  above  can  be  recorded  in  the following declaration  scheme:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  we have  Slightly  torn  apart  the  equations. The  initial  list of  identifiers  tells  uS to  "watch  out"  because  some auxiliaries  are being  introduced  in  the  order  given. The  following  sequence  of commands tells  us  how to  use these  auxiliaries  with si = Y i intended -in  the  order  as  written. Recursion  is  permitted  because  the various ';i may occur  wi thin the  Y J' Having  gone  to  the  trouble of  writing  1';0 first,  we  may not  only  regard  this  expression  as  a scheme  of  declaration  but  also  as  an  instruction  to carry  out  So first, thereby  activating  the  other I';i as  necessary  under  the control  of  the  Y (The  pretty  brackets  § and t are  not  strictly J . necessary.  since  we could  regard:  as  the  declaration  operation  and employ  the  colourless  ( and)  to  block  ambigui ty  but  one  can  carry

linguistic  stinginess  too  faL)

This  expansion  of  expression  now  requires  a revisioTl  of the synta~ for  conunands  whereby  the  principal  syntactical  equation (for  y) is  accompanied  by  some  auxiliary  equations  for  sequences (namely ~I'l and  yl'l):

rOMMAN OS

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

II  word  of  explanation  is  in  order  here. Greek E; is  a  metavariable over  identif:iers,  while I;;n by definition  is  a  metavariable  over n-tuples  of di~tinct identifiers. (We keep n&gt;O, so  the  tl-tuples are  nonempty.) The  metavariable yn ranges  over  n-tuples  cf commands (again, n&gt;O). In  the  last  clause  of  the  definition  fOT y  note  that  the E,n and  yn  have  the same  n. Our  language  therefOre is  no  longer  context-free. But,  if we may say  so,  who  caTes? Context-free  languages  have  limited  usefulness. Note,  too, that we  have  not  tried  to  torture  ourselves  wi th  too  rigorous  a  style of  BNF syntactical  defini tion. h'e  deny  that  our  syntax  is  un­ rigorous  or  even  unaesthetic. On the  other  hand  if  someone has a  really  neat language  definition  system  that  is  as  easy  to  com­ prehend  at  th is  level- ot discussion,  we shall beglad  to  consider it. The last  thing  we want  to  be  is  dogmatic  about langullge: it is  in  the  TJl(\thel'latization  of concepts that  we have  a certain  amount of  dogma  to  sell.

For  the  time  being  we introduce  no  revision  in  the  definition of  Boolean  expressions  E. Note that  the  command  construction

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is,  logically  speaking,  a var·iable-binding  operator. The  iden­ tifiers ~n are  the bound variables  (and,  since  a  matching with the  yn is  intended,  they  lI'.ust  be  kept  distinct); whereas  other identifiers  which  occur  may  occur  as fr·ee  variabl.es becau5e  the  con­ strnction  can  be  iterated. A  certain  semantical  device  "'ill have

to  be  introduced  to  handle  this  problem  of  scope  of  identifiers.

There  arc  other  problems,  however.  and  the  loop-example will  suffice  for  illustration. In  the  official  notation  there are  no  equations  for  commands as  such; rather  OUT  example  above becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

\oo'hich is  a  command  with  tbe  understanJing  that loop E Id. What is  the  exact  meaning  of  this  command? Whatever  it  is  our  dogma says  it must  be  a  state  transformation in [5  ..  SJ. Let  the  command be  called  1. for  short. We are  asking whattU).] should  be. In­ tuitively  we  want

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To  simplify  our  thinking  here  Ie t:

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Of  these r,.;;, and t are known, .... · h i  l e i is t~ ~known w.e seek. The functional  equation  for i reads:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Some solution  or  other  to  this  equation  if  any  exists  has the  right  to  be  called C[ ),J, the  meaning  mf th.e loO[pco~and as a  state  transformation.

!\ow  comes the  rub. So far  we haYe  not  anal yz.ed  the nature  of  the  set  S  at  all,  because  \;'e opted  for  extreme  generality. If  we ~tick to  this  generality  and  allow  the  functions r,e. and t to  be Ql'bi tJOal'y functions,  then  it  is  easy  to  construct  an example  where no solution  for  Jl. exists  in  the  above equation  at  all. The  reason  is  simple: f ,.;;, and t are total functions  so  interrelated that  any  attempt  to  define ~, as  required  sets  up  an infinite  loop: so that 710 choice  of  values  can  be  made  to  satisfy  the  equation tl

as  a  functional  equation  between  total  functions.

The  solution  to  this  problem  is  easy  enough  and  is  .. 'ell knmm: ... e  modify  our  idea  about the  function  space  [S -+ SJ, We no  longer  demand  that  functions  be  total  but  understand  the functions  in [S  ... 5] to  be  partial  functions. Thus for  certain cr E S  and  certain g E [S -+ 5] we allow g(o) to  be undefined. With this  convention  it  can  then  be  shown  that  the  E'quation  for i, does indeed  have  a solution  in  the  partial  function  sense.  and  in fact it has a leas t solution. (By least we  mean  that  the  "graph" of  the function  is  included  in  every  other  solution.) This approach  is  that  of  Park [4] and  many  others. (See  reInenees in  Engeler [1].) Sui table  as it  is  for  man)'  purposes  .and simple  as  it is,  it  is  not  quite  the  method  Wf&gt; wish  to ado~t. OUT  method  is Telated,  but  it  is  made  a little  mOTe  sophisticated in  oTdeT  to  supply  a closeT  analysis  of  the  nature  of  the  elements of  5  which  is TequiTed  faT  the  explanation  of  otheT  languaEe  featuTes.

3. LATTICES AND FIXED  POINTS. In  the  lelst  section  we  found  it necessary  to  expand  [5 ~ SJ to  allow  for  partial  functions. The set  of  all  partial  functions  is partially  ol'dered by  the  relations:.ip  of  one  function's being ~noluded in  the  other. Under  this partial ordering  the  set  [5  ... S] takes  on  a  structure  which  has quite  pleasant  properties. These  properties  can  be formulated in  an ~stract way.  so  that  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  solutions to  fixed-point  equations  can  easily  be  given. In  order  to  regular­ ize  and  generalize  this  argument, it  turns  out  to  be natural  to derive  the  structure  on  [5  ... 5] from  structure  on  S. This  is accompli.shed by expanding 5  until  it  becomes  a  partially  ordered set  itself  in  fact,  S  will  be  made into  a complete lattice. Just  how  this  construction  of  an  expanded  5 is  to  be done  requires a closer  examination  of  the  kind  of  elements  5  should  have. We will  have  to  return  to  this  question  in  more  detail  in  §S. For the  time  being  suppose  that  the  expansion  has  been  made.

the  structure D  requires  first

Speaking  a bit  more  generally  for  the  moment, of  a complete lattice  on  a  particular  domain (set) a partial  ordering  which  we  wri te  as

## x I;

## y

for x,!I E D. This  relationship  is reflexive,  transitive, and anti-8!/mmetric. Next.  if x.s 0 is  a subset  of  0,  we assume  the existence  of  an  element  of  0, called  the least  upper'  bound  (Zub) of  the  subset X, which  we write  as:

## Ux.

We have  for  ally E 0

Ux ~ y iff x ~ y. for  all x E X'

and  this  condition  uniquely  characterizes Ux  E D. lattice  is  a  partially  ordered  set  in  which lub's

A  complete always  exist.

Among  the lub's in  a complete  lattice  there are  two  extreme ones:  . the lub of nothing and  the lub of everything. That is to say,  the  empty  subset ~ and  the  full  subset D will  both  have lub's to  which  we give  special  names:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can  think  o£ .1 as  the weakest element  and  T as  the strongest element  of  D. The ordinary elements  are  somewhere  in  between, and.l  and T should  be  considered  rather  extraordinary. (We  can call  them bottom and top.)

An intuitive  way  of  reading  the  relationship  :.r ~ y is  to say  that x  approx-imates  y. Thus x is  worse  and y is  better. But take  care,  the sense  of  approximation  being  used  here  is  a qualitative one of  what  we might  style diroect  appro:zi.mation. The  statement x ~ if does not mean  that x is very  neal'  y. but  rather  that x is  a poor&gt;el'  version of Y. that x is  only  partially  specified  and  that  it can  be improved to if without  changing  any  of  the  definite  features of z. For  example  in  the  case  of  partial  functions. ~ means inclusion of  graphs (the  graph  of  a  function  is  just  the  set of ordered  pairs  of  arguments  and  function  values); hence. impz'ovement means adding new  ordered  pairs. The  smaller  set  of  ordered pai rs can  indeed  be  s  aid  to  be  an  apprOXimation  to  the  larger  one. (In the  case  of  partial  functions  treated  by  graphs  in  the  ordinary way.  the  structure  becomes  a lattice  only  when  T is  added  in a somewhat  artificial  way  as a top element  which  is  not  represented as  a  set  of  ordered  pairs. We shall  discuss  partial  functions in a  slightly  different  way  below.) Additional  examples  of  approx­ imations  treated  in  this  way  can  be  found  in  Scott [5] and  [6].

If  we take  the  notion  of  approximation  seriously, then  we have  to  rethink  what  we mean  by function. Thus  if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

x ~ Y.

then f should  not  juggle x and y Indeed  it  ough t to  follow  that around  in  too  arbitrary  a  fashion.

f(;c) ~ fey);

and

became  1:f  we improve :r to y, then in  "calculating" fry) the cal­ culatlOn  should  be  just  an  improvement  over  that  fOT f'(x). Mathenatically  speaking  the  reasonable  functions  ought  to  be ~

monotonic (i.e  ·· preserving).

Besides  the  intuitive  motivation  for  monotonic  functions, we have the  well-known  mathematical  fact  that monoton-ie  functions on c(}·r;p~ete ~attice6 alway'J  have  fixed  pOJ:nts. They  even  have least fixed  points. This  makes their  use  most  convenient  fOT OUT  ?urposes.'" Actually  the  functions  we  use  and  which  are appropriate  to  computation  theory  have  an  even  stronger  property; they are cont-inuous. (See  the  discussion  in  Scot t [5]  anJ  [6].) We shall  assume  this  stronger  property  but  shall  not  go into  the technical  details  in  this  paper. The reader  should  only  be  assured that normal  functions  are  automatically  continuous.

What does all  this  theorY  have  -to  do  wi th the  subject  of semantics'? Step  hy  step  the  relevance  .is  this: Commands (programs) are  naturally  thought  of  as  defining  state  transformations. Re­ cursive  commands  require  partial  functions. Solving  for  these partial  functions  is  just  finding  (minimal) fixed points  in  certain functional  equations. In  general  the  existence  of  fixed  points is  justified  by  a  lattice-theoretic  argument. Therefore,  if we can ~ee the  connection  between  lattices  and  partial  functions, the relevance  of  the  theory  will  be  estahlished.

Returning  to  5.  we promised  to  expand  it  to  a lattice. This can  be  done  in  many  ways,  but  for  simplicity  suppose  that  the  initial version  of  S  was just  an  abstract  set,  50,  say. In  50 we assume no  particular connection~ between  the  elements  for the  sake  of argument. The  expanded  5 results  merely  by  the adjunction  of  the two,  new  "ficticious"  elements  1 and  T. The  partial  ordering ~

", The argument  for  fixed  points  is  as  follows. Le t [ : [I -+ D be  monotonic. Let y .s. D be  the  subset  of  all y E D such  that b'~ a  whenever  [(a)!;  a ED. Let x == UY. To show  that x ~ [(x), note  first  that x E Y; because  if f(a) ~ 2, then  y ~ a for  all y E y. so x!; 2. Next  note  that f(x) E Y; because  if fez) !; z, then x~ a,  and  so  [(xl!; f(2) i; a  by  monotonicity. Therefore {x)!; Uy  == x. But  then f(f(x])!; [(r), again by  monotonicity, S~ oX!; f(x) because x E Y. Thus x = [(x).

aside  from  satisfying  the  usual  axioms,  provides  in  addition  only the  relationshi.ps:

to  mean that

-

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  new  element  1. can  be  regarded  as  an  "embodiment"  of  the  un­ defined. (The  companion  equation g-(o) = T could  be  read  "g(rJ) is overde[ined" ~ but  the  utility  of  this  concept  is  not  as  obvious.) Now  if [,g E [5 ~ 5]  are  any  two  functions.  we can  write

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  all  0 E  5. This  definition  at  once  structures  [5 ~ 5] as a partially  ordered  set  and  indeed  as  a  complete  lattice. This is a  natural  definition  for g's being  an  improvement  over f. if one reads  it  in  words,  and  it  corresponds  to  our  previous  ideas  about funct:ions. Thus  if [(0) = 1 (is  undefined).  then g(Oj is un\_ refrtJ'ic:ted and  can  be  any  element  of  5. If  [(0)  is  better defined (say,  [(0) = a' E  5 ),  then  g(o) can  only  be  0'  or T if  the  relation­ ship  [ ~ g is  going  to  hold. Hence [~ g means just  about  what  we intended  when we  said  that  the  ordinary  graph  of f is  included  in that  of g.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(For  pictures  of  these  and  other  partial  orderings  consult  Scott [5] and  [6J.) This  expanded  S  becomes  a  complete  lattice in  a rather  trivial  way, and  the  construction  should  not  be  taken as  being  typical.

The function  space  (5  .... SJ is  now regarded  as  being  the set  of all mono~onic functions from  S  into  S. (In  more  interest­ ing  lattices we shall  restrlct  our  function  spaces  to  the  continuous functions; in this  example  the  restriction  makes  no  difference.)

For a E  Sand g E [5  + S]  when  we formerly  wrote  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we shall  now  wri te  simply

Note  that by the  embodiment  of L. what  used to  be partial functions  are  now total functions  in  the  expanded  sense.  because g(eJ) = .L is  an  allowed  "value". This  may seem like  a silly  thing to  do,  but the main  mathematical  point  is  that  the lattice  structure on  [S -+ S] is  now del'ilJed, by  means  of  a  simple  definition,  from the  lattice  structure  on  S. And by the  very  same regular  process we can  provide  lattice  structure  on [$ -+ 5] -+ [5 -+ 5].  and  in general  on any [0 -+ 0']  always  remembering  to  use the  set  of continuous  functions  for  this  construction.

We can  now  make  more  precise  that  we mean by T as a lattice; namely  T = (.l,faZse.true,T}, where .L I; t ~ T holds  for t E  TJ but false q true and true [ false. We have  used  T  in  the context  T  x  S. and in  general  any  0 x  0'  can  he  construed  as  a lattice  if  0 and  0'  are. One  has  only  to  define:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  all ;x,y E 0 and x'.y' ED'. In  this  way  all  of  the  domains [T  ... [S  ... T  x  SJJ.  etc.  can  be  regarded  as  lattices.  and  by  the general  method  fixed  points  can  be  obtained  when  necessary. In particular  in  the  equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

f,e,t were  certain oon8ta~ts in  their  intended  domains.  and Cond, "," were  certain  functions (operators)  on  these  domains. Under the present  interpretation  all  these  domains  are  lattices,  and it  can  be  checked  that  all  these  functions  are  indeed  continuous. Therefore,  the  function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  itself  a  continuous  functionj and  we know  that  such  functions have  fixed  points. The  price  of  generality  is  high,  but  eventually there  are  some  returns  on  your  investment.

Another  kind  of  pay-off  was  discussed  in  some  detail  in Scott [6]. In  that  paper  the syntaaticaZ domains  were  taken to be  lattices  also,  and  it  was  found  that  the  mapping where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

was  not  only  continuous  but  its exi6tence could  be  proved  by  the very  same  lattice-theoretical  argument via fixed  points. That is  a rather  fundamental  point  and  unifies  the  theory  considerably.

The  whole  process  of  forming  fixed  points  can  be  given  a functional  formulation. Let  0 be any  complete  lattice  and l~t [0  -+ [lJ be  the lattice  of  continuous  functions. Then  there  is  a mapping

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such  that  for  each f E ro DJ the  element YCf) E D i6 the  least fixed  point  o£ f. Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

will  be  satisfied. What is remark~ble and  particularly  useful is  that .Y itself  is (!ontinuous. Thus  if  we  employ  Y  in  various equations  along  with  other  continuous  functions  we can  rest assured  that  the  compound  functions  obtained  are  also  continuous. This  makes  the  theory  very smooth, if  the  reader  will  forgive the pun.

In  mak ing  up  the-se  lattices  it  is  sometimes  useful  to join  two  lattices  together  into  one. We write  D + D'  to  mean the  result  of  taking  a copy  of  D  and  a  disjoint  copy  of  D'  and forming the union. To  make this  union  a lattice  we identij'y the 1 E 0 with  the l' E 0'  and  similarly  for  TEO  and  T'  E I)' (.1 = l' and  T = T'.) Thus, for  "ordinary"  elements  of I) + I)' we can  say.  roughly,  that  either  they  are  elements  of  0  or  of  0' but not  both. The!;  relations  are  carried  over  directly  with no connections  imposed  between  the  elements  of  the  disjoint  parts. We shall  in  § 5 discuss  considerahly  more  complex  constructions  of lattices  of  a "recursive"  nature,  but  first  it  is  necessary  to explain  the  semantical  treatment  of  identifiers.

4. IDENTIFIERS  AND ENVIRONMENTS. In §Z we introduced  into  our syntax  for  commands the identifiers (t; E Id). An identifier :=;tanding  alone  is  an  "unknolo'n"  having  no  predetermined  meaning of  its  own -in  contrast  to  tile  constants. The  way  one  wishes to  use identifiers,  ho,,"'ever, is  to  give  them te1';po:r'ary meanings which  can  be  altered  within  the  differing  scopes  of  different operators. The  way to  indicate  a temporary  assignment  of  meanings is by a  function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which we call  (the  current) environment of  the  identifiers. We use  lS + SJ here  because  in  the  elementary  command language  the values  of  the  variables  are  to  be  command  values. In  other languages  with  other  types  of  variables  other  types  of  values would  have  to  be  used.

- -

Let  us  write  for  short:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now  1t  will  no  10I'.ger  be  true that  a command  has a "fixed"  value, bec~se our  syntax  allows  y  E Cmd to  contain  variables. What  we have  to  do is  to  redefine e so  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That  is  to  say,  given y E Cmd, we do  not  evaluate at  once e[ yn but  rather  have  to  provide  the  current  0 E Env to finde~y~ (p)

as a state  transformation.

The  details  of  this  redefinition  of e will  require alt~ erations  of  the  environments. Our  notation  for this  is  the following. Suppose r. E ld,  8 E [5 + 5J.  and  0 E Env. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

p'  which  is  just  like  p  except  for  the  one is  that  environment i dentifier ~ where  we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Thus p' '"  PI:8/0  is  the modl~f{cation of  the  function  0  just  at the  argument  r, to  have  the  prescribed  value  8.) Generalizing this idea  we can also  .;rite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where en E [5 -+ SJ".  the  set  of  n-tuples  of sta.te transformations. IleTe E;:n is  a group  of n distinct  identifiers  and  the  alteration changes  all  the ~I values  of  the  original  P. (These  defInitions require  just  a bit  more  rigor  when  Id  is  taken  as  a lattice  in  the more  abstract  version  of  syntax  of  Scott [6J.)

We can  now  state  the  revised  clauses  of  the  semantical definition  for  t'. (The  function Eo retains  its  former  definition, because  in  this  simple  language  Boolean  expressions  contain no identifiers. )

t'!(y)](p) ~tlYncp), t:~¢&gt;~(P) -'= (some  given  S + S).

tldummyD(p)  = I, e"n ( p) ~ pHI,

tiE· Yo  .YI)lp) -'= CondCCIYo](p),efYI l(p»·&amp;[£I, t:'[Yo ;YI](P) = eiYI~(p)o~iyo](p).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These  clauses are  quite  similar  to  the  previous  ones.  except  that the  environment  is  dragged  along  into  the  interpretation  of  each compound  command. It  is  invoked  whenever  an  identifier  stands in  the  place  of  a  command (giving  p[f.;) in  the  fourth  claust!). is  altered  whenever  identifiers  are  bound  as  formal  parameters. This  last  clause  requires  a gloss.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  yn = Y 'Y1'"  "Yn-l  is  an n~tuple of  commands. Therefore O the  metaexpre ssion

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can  be  regarded  as  a funotion of  the  n-tuple en E [5 + S]n whose values  are  also  in  [5 + 5]n. The ),,-expression

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  just  the  name  of  that  function  in  the  domain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  i-operator  used  in  the  equation  above  is  then  to  have  the

It

logical  type and  setting

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Cf. t~e end  of  the last  section  taking  0  '"  ["5 .... SJn.J The  value of  this  Y-operator  is  an  n-tuple,  and /.fn is  the selector function o such  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are  doing  here,  then,  is  finding  the  least  solution  to  the

What  we equation (really:  a system of n equations)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our  mathematical  equations  describe  this  process  rather  succinctly with  the  aid  of  the vari~us functfonal-op-erators. At  first5-ight these operators  seem  horrendous.  but  actually  they are  not  hard to  read. Furthermore  they hide just  the  right  things  leaving  the structure  and  sequencing  of  the  operations  quite  apparent. It would  also  seem  to  be  an  advantage  to  condense  the various  clauses to  one  or  two  lines: if one  can  actually  write  equations  in  detail, he  may have  a chance  of  proving  a  theorem. And  his  chances  are improved  if  the  equations  are  not  too  long. It  remains  to  be seen,  admittedly.  whether  the  method  is  going  to  be really  practical for  more  complex  languages.

In  the  introduction  we  spoke  of models for a theory,  and  it will be  useful  now  to  return  to  this  discussion  in  the  present context. The  concepts  of  our  language  are  separated  into  two kinds: the pI'imitive  notions and  the logical  cons tructs which  are built  on  these. In  the  simple  command  language  the  primitive notions  are  the  set  of  states  S  and  the  objects  denoted  by  the '!T'S and ~'s. Let  us  introduce  explicitly  syntactical categories  for these:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for the  atomic  predicates  and  operations. All  the  other  concepts like  the  Boolean  values,  the  conditional  expressions,  the  sequencing and looping  of  commands  are  treated  as  logical  notions  with  fixed

meanings. The  only  chance fOT  variation  then  lies  in  the  primitive concepts. The  interpretation  of  them  would  be  established  by gi ving  mappings

and and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

once 5  has  been  determined. We could  then  say  that  in  broad  out­ line  models aTe given  as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

because  once these  features aTe specified  the  meanings  of  all  ex­ pressions  in  the  language aTe fixed. Of  course  all  we  have  explained here  is  the log7:cal  types of tp and 1:'. but  that  is  all  one  needs to give  the  semantical  definitions  for

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(That  is.  in the  semantical  defini tions  we should  replace  e by and  8, by ~b1 and  modify  the  atomic  clauses  to  read:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By  the  way. in  Scott [6] the 0' and  the  1&gt;  were treated  as  para­ meters  and  it  was  noted  that  with  S  fixed  both ~and~are continuous in  these  paTameters.)

With this  point  of  view  we can  specialize  and  vary.t1  in restricted  classes  that  actually are models  for  some  reasonable concept  of  computational  structure ~ as  we  contemplated  for  various models  of  the theory  of  integers. Besides  this  we can compare two  models. Thus if  Yo and  Yl are  two  commands,  we say  that they are equivalent. in 11  iff

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It  may very  well  be  that  '(g and '(I are  equivalent  in 1M  but  not in ti'. That  may  be  an  interesting  fact. Whether  it  is  or not.  we can  at  least  say  what  we  mean  with  the  aid  of  our  semantical definitions.

C..

5. PROCEDURES. The language  features  discussed  up  to  this  point have  been  of  the  most  elementary  sort  and  were  kept simple  just  fOT the  sake  of  illustration. Even  so  the  mathematical  entities associated  with  the  commands  and  expressions  ,",'erc  involved  enough. Fortunately  the  level  of  complication  that  we have reached  is  a plateau  on  which  a  variety  of  other  features  can  be  accommodated without  too  much  additional  effort. Among  the  features  pressing for  recognition  is  of  course  the assignment  8tatement. No  pro­ grarruning  language c~n be  called  practical  if  it  does  not  include the  assignment  statement  in  some  form. The issues  surrounding the  proper  interpretation  of  the  assignment  statement,  however, require  a rather  full  treatment  of  their  own, and this  will  have to  be  reserved  for  another  publication  (Strachey [ll]J. In this section  we select  only  one  concept ~ that  of  a procedure to  discuss in  any  detailj  IIt8inly  because  it .fits  in  well  with  our previous  discussion  of  identifiers  and  function  spaces. Even  with this addition  the  language  remains  fragmentary. (In  the  syntax  we shall  make  provision  for  an  assignment  statement.  but  the  semantics of  it  and  some  other  related  ideas  will  only  be  briefly  sketched. These  inclusions  are  made  so  that  the  reader  can  grasp  something of  the  style  of  the  languages  we are  considering.)

In  order  to  be  able  to  include  other  concepts  in  our langlJage  a  substantial  extension  of  the  repertoire  of  expressions bey(){ld  the  Boolean  level  will  be  necessary. In  some  languages this  is  done  through  the  introduction  of  a  host  of  syntactical categories. This  may  be  a  practical  idea  to  aid  automatic  syntax checking  and  error  detection,  but  for  understanding  the  language  as a whole  it  is  sometimes  a formidable  hurdle. For  the  sake  of  ex­ position  we pretend  that  all  the  type  checking  is going  to  be done at :run time. Thus  all  the  expressions  that  have values will  be massed  together  into  one  category. Before  we start  to  define  the category  we should  stop  to  consider  what  the  values  are  going  to  be.

may  as  we 11  throw

We always  need BooZean  vaZues (TJ. and  we in  at  this  point (integerJ al'ithmetio values (N). If  we  will

be  getting  into  assignments,  then  some  expressions  will  have Locations (addresses)  for  values (L). Tn this  paper  we  will  not say  too  much about  them.  but  we  want to  leave  room  for  them. Next  we bring up  the  suggestion  that  at  some  point  one  may  \oIan t to  store  or  maybe  pass  as  a  parameter  a command. Hence  we are  going  to allow  elements  of  C = [S -+ 5]  as  values  of  express­ ions  also. Finally  we  come to  procedures (P).

A  procedure  is  very  much like  a  mathematical  function. Now some  functions  have  restricted  domains,  while  others  are  more widely  defined. We do  not  ",·ish  to  consider  here  typed  fUl1ctions. so  we shall  attempt  to  permit  OUT  funcbollS ,i free  range  of arguments  and  values. The  different  sorts  of  values  were  just described  in the last  paragraph. Let \..IS put  them  together  into one  space.  the va~ue srace~

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again  for  simplicity  we restrict  attention  to one\_parameter pro­ cedures; that  is,  the  domain  of  a function  will  be  V  itseH. The values  will  also  turn  up  in  V but the  path  cannot  be  so  direct. Remember  that  every  evaluation  has  to  depend  on  the  state  of  the system.  and  that  any  action  generally  has  to  effect  a  change  of state. It will  be  just  the  same  for  procedures: evaluating  a procedure  at an  argument  may  produce  along  with  a  value  a  change of  state. This  argument  suggests  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus  if  rEP and x E  V. then  we cannot  find  a  value  from p(x) we look at 0 E 5. Then we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where y is  the  value  and  0'  is  the (possibly)  altered  state. That seems just  fine.

Or  does it? Suppose  the  state  space  were  a  one-dement space  which could  be  dropped  from  consideration. Suppose  that  we are  in  a  dropping  mood  and  that  we forget  about  N.L,  and  C as  well. Then  the  equation  for  V  comes  down  to:

until

which  after  substitution  reads:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  words we can  say  that  under  the reduction  every  element  of  V  is eithu' a  Boolean  value Or' a function. It  still  sounds  good,  but there  is  trouble: in  ordinary  set  theory  there  are no  such  spaces! Why? Because  there  is  a  cardinality  question. V  must  have at least  two  elements; but  if  so, then  by  Cantor's  Theorem  the  space of a;~ functions  [V  .... VJ always  has more elements than  V. Hence, the  equation  is  impossible.

Here  is  the  place  where  the  lattice-theoretic  pay-off  is especially  generous. By restricting  [V + VJ to continu.ous functions the  cardinality  of  the  function  space  is  considerably  reduced. That is  a  help.  but it is  oot- enou-gh-just  to  have  V  and  T + EV .. VJ in anyone-one  correspondence. The  correspondence  must  be continuous; then  everything  is  fine,  because  we can  rest  assured  that  all  our functional  equations  involve  only  continuous  functions. (Remember. to  be able  to  use a function  as  an  argument  of  other  operators,  we must  keep  it -inside the  proper  spaces.) The  way to  achieve  a  con­ tinllous  isomorphism  is  not  quite  obvious  and  demands  8n  inductive  con­ struction. Some  rem8rks  are  given  in  Scott [S] and  further  hints arc  found  in  Scott [6]. The  full  details  will  be  presented  in papers  under  preparation  (see  references  in  the  bibliography). In any  case  the  outcome  is  that  the  construction  of such  self-referential spaces  is  not  only  possible,  but  they  can  be  made to  suit  a variety of  purposes  as  long  as  one  can  be  happy  "ith  continuous  fur,ctions. Since  we can  argue  that  computability  theory is happy  with  continuous functions, all  is  well,  and  the  existence  of  the big  value  space  V can  be taken  for  granted.

All  right.  what  then  is  the (a)  language that  might  go  along "ita  V? {The  authors  have  the  peculiar  idea  that the  domains  of  our concepts  can  be  quite  rigorously  laid  out before  we make final the choice  of  the  language  in  which  we are  going  to  describe  these  concepts. And  it  may turn  out  that  the same domain  is  suitable  for several languages. This  is  not  to  deny  tha t there  may be  some  vague  ideas

of  language  which  influence  our  choice  of  domains. What  we  suggest is  that,  in  order  to  sort  out  your  ideas,  you  put  your  domains  out on  the  table  first. Then  we can  all  start  talking  about  them.) A possible  format  of  the  language  would  retain  the  distinction  in category between Cmd and  Exp. (This  is  a point  one  might  liish  to debate  but  we  do  not  have the  space  to  do it  here.) It is  Exp will  undergo  the  major  expansion  over  the  earlier  language,  50  we that give Cmd first:

COMMANDS

<!-- image -->

This  looks  almost  the  same  as  before  except  for  the  last  two  clauses. is  needed  for

Since  we  will convert  commands  into  expressions.  the  E! the  reverse  process. rhe Eo  :=£1 is  the  assignment  statement taken  as  a cornman d to  make the  required  assignment.

Turning  now to  expressions  we must take  note  of  the  five parts  of  V:

EXPRESSIONS

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note  that  identifiers  occur  in  both  Cmd and  Exp. Some  may  wish to avoid  the  overlap,  but  it  actually  does  not  cause  any  difficulty, because  we  will  separate  values  in  a  moment.

Before  trying  to  understand  the  features  of  this  language. it  will  be  well  to  state  the  exact  logical  types  of  the  sernantical functions. An identifier  will  be  assigned  an  element either from  C 01" from  V  depending  on  how it  is  to  be  used. This  means  that  nOl.'

we  shall  have to  set:

and and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Strictly  speaking  C. II and  C + II are  all  different  domains  even though  the  first  two  are  matched  with parts of  C + V. We requin  a  more  precise  notation  to  indicate  this  matching. A completely  precise  symbolism  would  be  cumbersome,  so  ...'e  write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  5  E C  and .B E II to  indi cate  the eorr'e8ponding clements  of

C  + II. For is E C +  V we wTi te

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to  indicate  the  "projection"  from  C + V onto  its  two parts. (In case ~ corresponds  to  an  element  of  C, then  61 II = .L; and if  8  comes from V. then  0 I C =.L. The  lack  of  precision  becomes  clear  for spaces  such  as  C + C  where  one  would  havE'  to  distinguish  between left- and  right-hand  paTts-.)­

The logical  types  of  the  functions  e' and fr. now  will  be  these;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We shall  not  state  all  the  semantical  equations,  since  either  they have  already  been  discussed  enough  for  thE' ~impler languagE',  or  thE'y require  too  much  additional  development. But a few  can  be  shown.

For  the  case  of  identifiers,  we use:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which  keep the  types  straight. Note  that  in  the latter  equation we had  to  make  the  right  hand  side  a function  of IT E S  with  values in V x S. The  point  is  that  if  we ask  for  the  value  of ~ as an expnsslon  relative  to  the  environment  and  the  state  of  the  system, then  the  answer  is  to  be just  P(E.;) I V  without any  change  of  state.

Wi th  the  two  new  kinds  of  commands,  we instance:

have  in  the  first shall

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Do is  a special  operator  defined  as  follows.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By  this  we mean  to  indicate  that  C [S -+ SJ is  itself  a part  of IJ. Thus  if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then  we  project  B into siC and  apply  that  to  0'  obtaining 0" = (eIC)(o').

That  is  the  resultant  Change  of  state  in  executing  e:! so  that t'nc!)ep)(a)  = 0"

In  the  second instance,  the  assignment  command, the  sequence  of events  is  more complicated.

In  this  paper  we shall  not try  to  wri te  the  equation  for eKEo :=£11 (p)(a), but  we can  say  in  words  more  or  less  what  happens. We first evaluate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and  project  t3 to a. SIL. aJDcation. Next  we  evaluate:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now  comes the scuffle, If  t3' is  not  in  the  part  of  V  which  comes from  l, we set 13" = 13' However,  if 13 does correspond to  a ' location,  then  we consider (I' '" S'lL. At this  point  we reveal  that these mysterious  "states  of  the  system"  are  the  internal  states  of our  hypothetical  machine. That  is  to  say,  0"  represents  (among other  things) the  current st~te of  the memory of  the  machine -a memory  which  provides contents for locations. Thus there  is  a function  to be applied  to  extract the desired  contents.  and we can write:

we have  to  find  first:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In any  case  we  have e" E V. Finally  there  is  one  last  transformation to  be  made: we have  a  location (l and  a  value e" and the current  5  tate Oil All  that  remains  is  to assign e" to  0. in  air  obtaining:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We then  assert  that  the  equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

makes  the  interpretation  of  the  command  what  is  usually  intended. Well,  that  is  reasonably  precise,  but  it  only  becomes  completely rigorous  when  we give  an  explicit oonstrL&lt;otion of  S as  a  domain internal  states  along  with  the  concomitant  functions Conte'lts and Assign. The  exposition  of  these  ideas  is the task of  Strachey [ 11], of

Shifting  now  to  the  semantics  of  expressions,  the  compounds of  the  sort  E:D  are  meant  as  Boolean  valued  predicates  which  dis­ tingu~h between  the  various  parts  of  V; namely,  0 =  T,N,l,e  or P Take  note  of  the  fact  that  T  has  been  made a part  of  V  so that after a  Boolean  value  t E T  has  been  found. it will havE'  to  be injected  into  V. For  example.  to  find  the  value  of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we  have  to  evaluate  Eo. then  E.,  then  see  if  they  belong  to  the  samE' part  of  V. If  they  do  and  the  part  is  T ,N, or  l, then  a test  for equality is  meaningful. We carry  the  test  out,  get  a truth  value. and  then  wrap it  up into  V. Remember  too  that  the state  of  the systel'l will  have  been  changing.

We need  not  discuss  here  the  evaluation  of  numerals (v) or ari thllJetic  operations (w). The  mysterious  operators  t and + are for J',&gt;fel'en~ing and deroeferoencing -operations  involving  locations. Thus  to  evaluate:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

fo[ E I ( p) (0 ) &lt;6,0';'  .

Then  we have to  find  a new (unused) location  a in a and  take a" = Assigrda,6)(LT'), making

Here  13 E V  an d

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  other  .... ords tE gives  a reference to  the  value  of  c. Obviously we  want +E to be  the  opposite: E is  evaluated  as  having  a  value in L and  then the conter.t-s of  the  current  state  of  the  system  pro­

vide the  value  for +£.

In  the  case  of  commands as  expressions  we take

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note  especially  that no change  of  state  has  taken  place  and  that tnI') (p) has not been  activated. The  command  has  been  "read",  so to  speak,  but it has  not  been  executed. Why do  we do  this? one  may  .... ish  to store  a command  or  to  pass  it  as  a  parameter without executing  it. In  that  way  it  can  be  set  up  and  then  set  aside fnr later  use.

Because

Before we finish  our  survey  of  the  semantics  with  a  look at  procedures,  the  res.ult;s-construct  can  be  given  a  quick explanation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That is  to say,  do I' first, then evaluate  c. This  combination  is very  similar  to  Yo  ;y. but  is  of  a  different  syntactical  category.

Finally,  we come to  procedures  where  the  notation  llsed in the languagE:' is  just  that  of  the  functional  abstraction/functional application  sort. Abstraction  is  easy:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f E Pis  de fined  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

comes  out  correctly  by  reference  to  the  logical  type  of &amp;. Note

that  tile  evaluation  of  a functional  abstraction  requires  no  change of  statr, This  is reasonable  because  none  of  the  state  trans­ formations  that may be lurking  in  £: can  come out  in the  open  until we knO'! .. the  value  of ('j. This  cannot  be  known  at  the  time  the function  is  defined; we have  to  wait  until  it  is  applied  to  an argument.

Application  can  be  interpreted  in  at  least  two  ways. We take  a  more di reet  path  which  might  not  be  the  most  flexible.

Thus to  evaluate:

first  find and  set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and  set f 61  P. Then  find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(The "indirect"  route  ""Quld  test  S  to  see  if  it  were an L, if  so all it would  require  is  to  look  up the  contents  of  thnt  location and  try  to  use  that  value. If  B  were  not  in  the  L part  of  V, then  ",c  would  proceed  as  above.)

By the  time  we got  around  to  the  procedures so  very  much to  say. The  point  is  of  course  that

ACE

is  but  one  clause  of  a  highly  recursive  definition. The  £: can be any compound expres~ion. Thus the  value  of  Ai;.. E is  a  complicatE'd function. The  construction  of  our  value  space  allows  us to  treat this  function (a m~thcmatical object)  just  like  any  other  value. It  can  be used  as an nrgument  of  another  function. it can  be  stored, it  can  be thought  about  in  a nlathematical  way.

there  was  not

6. CONCLUSION There  are  many  features  l"issinF  fTOI!'  the lan~u£ige at  the  last section; to  name a few: lists,  structured  values, initiali2.ation  of  parameters, mOTC flexible  parameter  passing, recursive  procedure  definitions. This  last  is  very iJllportant. Even  though the  space

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

contains  all the  values  of  procedures · ... :c gave  no  notation  faT re­ cursively  defined  procedures  the  way  we did  for  recursively  defined commands. The reason  for  passing  oyer  that  topic  is  the  difficulty in  keeping  track  of  the  state  transformations  involved  in  such definitions. This  will have to  be a topic  faT  another  essay.

Despite  the  shortcomings  of  the  present  exposition,  we do feel,  however,  that  we have  demonstrated  the  possibility  of  a  math­ ematical  semantics  for  sophisticated  languapes. And  we hope  by now  the  reader  understands  what  we  mean  by  "mathematical  semantics". In  this  approach  the  semantical  functions  give  mathematical  values to  expressions values  related  to  some  given  model. The  values of  expressions  are  determined  in  such  a  way that  the  value  of  a whole  expression  depends  functionally  on the  values  of  its parts the  exact  connection  being  found  throup,h the  clauses  of  the  syn­ tactical  definition  of  the  language. In this  way the  syntax  is kept  to  a  minimum  so  one  can  concentrate  on  the  semantical  inter­ pretation.

The  advantages  of  the  method  arc  many. In the  first  place we feel  that it  gets  at  the  essence  of  meaning:  without  having  to formalize  any  bookkeeping,  symbol  tahles,  identifier  lists,  road maps  or  what  have  you  as is  necessary  in  some  lang:uage  definitions. Furthermore, the  method  is  conceptual  and is not just  a formal trans­ lation  from one language  into  another. Sometimes  the  translation scheme  is  useful,  but  usually  a full  translation,  say  into  the lang:uage  of an  "abstract"  machine,  makes  it  hard  to  discuss the features  of  the  o"riginal  language  in  isolation. As we have  shown above  we can  move through  the  lanpuage  one  clause  at  a time, stopping to  get a clear  understanding  o-f  each  construct  by  itself.

"

The  present  paper  is on~ of  a  series  that  is the  outcome  of a collaboration  which  the  authors  started  in  the  fall  of  1969; further  papers  are  mentioned  in  the  references. As  it no~ stands this t~eory falls  into  two  rather  distinct  parts: th~ development of  tht  appropriate  mathematical  apparatus,  and  its  application  to the  application  of  programming  languages. From  a logical  point of  view the development  of  the  mathematical  foundations  should obviously  precede  their  application,  but  as  often  happens  it  is difficult'to kna... exactly  what  mathematical  apparatus  is  needed until some  applications  have  been  attempted.

The  genesis  of  this  approach  is  a  paper  given  at  a  Working Conference  on  Formal  Language  Description  Languages  sponsored  by ]FIP  in  September  1964 (Strachey  [10]). Although  that  paper contained  the  beginnings  of  the  semantical  ideas  described  here'.  it was quite  unsatisfactory  "from  a- mathematical  point  of  vie....'. Not only lias there  no  attempt  at  mathematical  rigor, but  the  very existence  of  some  of  the  objects  used  was  not  certain. For  example, referring  again  to  the  domain  mentioned  in  §5  which  is  quite  naturally associated  with  interpretations  of  reasonable  languages;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

it  is  particularly  important  to  note  that  such  a domain cannot be constructed  by  ordinary  set-theoretical  means. Hence,  the  need for  some such  mathematical  apparatus  as  we  have  presented  here  was forc~d on  us. The  present  paper  co\'ers  much the same  ground  as Strachey {lOLbut  this  time  the  mathematical  foundations  are  secure. It  is  also  intended  to  act  as  a  bridge  between  the formal  mathematical foundations  and  their  applications  to  programming languages  by explaining  in  Some  detail  the  notation  and  techniques  we have  found to  be most  useful.

Very  much  work  remains  to  be  done. An essential  topic  will be  the  discussion  of  the  relation  between  tlle  mathematical  semantics for a language  and  the  implementation  of  the  language. What  we claim  the  mathematics  will  have  provided  is  the  standard  against which  to  judge  an  implementation. Thus  if &gt;'CE is  a  function definition,  then  our  semantics  tells  us  which  function  as  a  math­

ematical  object  ""as inter,,~ed. Any  implementation  must  provide us  with  answers  that  are  in  complete  harmony  with  this  function  in the  same way we expect  even  the  simplest  desk  calculator to  be  able to  add. An  interesting  question  here  is  ""hether  the  function defined  by '\/;.(:  is  calculable  at  all  in  any  sense. All  of  these questions are  basic  and  do  not  even  make  sense  without  the  proper mathematical  foundation,  which  is  just  what  we think  our  theory provides.

## REFERENCES

- [1] Erwin  Engeler,  ed .·  Semantics  of  Algorithmi c  Languages, Springer  Lecture  Notes  in  Mathematics,  vol. 188 (1971).
- [2] Donald  E. Knuth. Semantio~ of  Context-FJ'ee  Language8. Mathematical  Systems  Theory.  vol.  2 (1968).
3. pp.  127-145.
- [3] · examp~eB of  Formal.  Semantics, in  [1).  pp.
5. 212-235.
- [4] David  Park, Fixpoint  Induction  and  Pl'oofs  of Program Propel'ties. in  Machine Intelligence  5  (1969).  pp. 59-78.
7. [S] Dana  Scott, Outl.ine  of  a  Mathematioal.  Theo:roy  of  Computation, in  Proc. of  the  Fourth  Annual Princeton  Conference  on Information  5cieflces  and  Systems (1970),  pp.  169-176.
8. [6J The Lattice  of  Fl.ow  Diagrams, in  [1].  pp. 311-366.
- [7] Continuous  Lattices, in  Proc.  Dalhousie  Conference. Springer  Lecture  Notes,  in  press.
10. [8J , Lattl-ce-tlleoretic  Models for  Various  Type-free Calculi, in  preparation.
- [9] · Data  Types  a8  Lattices, in  preparation.
- [10] Christopher  Strachey, Towards a  Formal  Semantics, in Formal Lan9uage  Description  Languages, r. B.  Steel,  ed., North  Holland  (1966),  pp.  198-220.
- [11] , An  Abstract  Model  for  Storage, in  preparation.

## Programming  Research  Group  Technical ~Ionographs

This  is a  series  of  technical  monographs  on  topics  in  the field  of  computation. Further  copies may be  obtained  from  the Programming  Research  Group,  45  Banbury  Road,  Oxford,  England,  or, generally,  direct  from  the  author.

- PRG-l Henry r.  Ledgard Production  Sy8tem8:  A  FOT'mali8m  for  Specifying :he S1:lr1ta.x  and  Translation  of  ComputeT'  Lang1J.1ges. (£1.00,  $2.50)
- PRG-2 Dana  Scott Old b:ne  of  a  Mathematical  Theol'y  of  Computation (£0.50.  $1.25)
- PRG-3 Dana  Scott The Lattice  of Flo~ Diagrams ('1.00.  $2.50)
- PRG-4 Chris tophc r St rachel' An  Abstract  Model for  Storage (in  preparation)
- PRG-5 Dana  Scott  and  Christopher  Strachel' Data  Types  as  Lattices (in  preparation)
- PRG-6 Dana  Scott  and  Christopher  Strachey Toward  a Mathematical  Semantic8 fo'!'  Computer Languages. (£1.00,  $2.50)
- .PRG-7 Dana  Scott Continuous  Lattices (£l.00.  $2.50)
