## R. E. KALMAN

Research Institute for Advanced Study, 2 Baltimore, Md.

## A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction Problems 1

The  classical  filtering  and  prediction  problem  is  re-examined  using  the  BodeShannon  representation  of  random  processes  and  the  'state  transition'  method  of analysis of dynamic systems.  New results are:

- ( 1 ) The formulation and methods of solution of the problem apply without modification  to  stationary  and  nonstationary  statistics  and  to  growing-memory  and  infinitememory filters.
- ( 2 ) A  nonlinear  difference  (or  differential)  equation  is  derived  for  the  covariance matrix  of  the  optimal  estimation  error.    From  the  solution  of  this  equation  the  coefficients  of  the  difference  (or  differential)  equation  of  the  optimal  linear  filter  are  obtained without further calculations.
- ( 3 ) The filtering problem is shown to be the dual of the noise-free regulator problem. The new method developed here is applied to two well-known problems, confirming and extending earlier results.

The  discussion  is  largely  self-contained  and  proceeds  from  first  principles;  basic concepts of the theory of random processes are reviewed in the Appendix.

## Introduction

A N IMPORTANT class of theoretical and practical problems in communication and control is of a statistical nature. Such problems are: (i) Prediction of random signals; (ii) separation  of  random  signals  from  random  noise;  (iii)  detection  of signals  of  known  form  (pulses,  sinusoids)  in  the  presence  of random noise.

In  his  pioneering  work,  Wiener  [1] 3 showed that problems (i) and  (ii)  lead  to  the  so-called  Wiener-Hopf  integral  equation;  he also gave a method (spectral factorization) for the solution of this integral  equation  in  the  practically  important  special  case  of stationary statistics and rational spectra.

Many extensions and generalizations followed Wiener's basic work.  Zadeh  and  Ragazzini  solved  the  finite-memory  case  [2]. Concurrently  and  independently  of  Bode  and  Shannon  [3],  they also gave a simplified method [2] of solution.  Booton discussed the  nonstationary  Wiener-Hopf  equation  [4].  These  results  are now in standard texts [5-6]. A somewhat different approach along these  main  lines  has  been  given  recently  by  Darlington  [7].  For extensions  to  sampled  signals,  see,  e.g.,  Franklin  [8],  Lees  [9]. Another  approach  based  on  the  eigenfunctions  of  the  WienerHopf  equation  (which  applies  also  to  nonstationary  problems whereas  the  preceding  methods  in  general  don't),  has  been pioneered  by  Davis  [10]  and  applied  by  many  others,  e.g., Shinbrot [11], Blum [12], Pugachev [13], Solodovnikov [14].

In all these works, the objective is to obtain the specification of a  linear  dynamic  system  (Wiener  filter)  which  accomplishes  the prediction, separation, or detection of a random signal. 4

---

1  This research was supported in part by the U. S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Contract AF 49 (638)-382.

2  7212 Bellona Ave.

3  Numbers in brackets designate References at end of paper.

4   Of  course,  in  general  these  tasks  may  be  done  better  by  nonlinear filters. At present, however, little or nothing is known about how to obtain (both theoretically and practically) these nonlinear filters.

Contributed by the Instruments and Regulators Division and presented at the Instruments and Regulators Conference, March 29- Apri1 2, 1959, of THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS.

NOTE: Statements and opinions advanced in papers are to be understood as  individual  expressions  of  their  authors  and  not  those  of  the  Society. Manuscript  received  at  ASME  Headquarters,  February  24,  1959.  Paper No. 59-IRD-11.

Present methods for solving the Wiener problem are subject to a  number  of  limitations  which  seriously  curtail  their  practical usefulness:

- (1) The optimal filter is specified by its impulse response. It is not a simple task to synthesize the filter from such data.
- (2) Numerical determination of the optimal impulse response is often quite involved and poorly suited to machine computation. The  situation  gets  rapidly  worse  with  increasing  complexity  of the problem.
- (3)  Important  generalizations  (e.g.,  growing-memory  filters, nonstationary  prediction)  require  new  derivations,  frequently  of considerable difficulty to the nonspecialist.
- (4)  The  mathematics  of  the  derivations  are  not  transparent. Fundamental  assumptions  and  their  consequences  tend  to  be obscured.

This paper introduces a new look at this whole assemblage of problems, sidestepping the difficulties just mentioned. The following are the highlights of the paper:

- (5) Optimal Estimates and Orthogonal Projections. The Wiener problem is approached from the point of view of conditional  distributions  and  expectations.  In  this  way,  basic  facts  of the Wiener theory are quickly obtained; the scope of the results and the fundamental assumptions appear clearly. It is seen that all statistical  calculations  and  results  are  based  on  first  and  second order averages; no other statistical data are needed. Thus difficulty  (4)  is  eliminated.  This  method  is  well  known  in probability theory (see pp. 75-78 and 148-155 of Doob [15] and pp. 455-464 of Loève [16]) but has not yet been used extensively in engineering.
- (6) Models  for  Random  Processes. Following,  in  particular, Bode and Shannon [3], arbitrary random signals are represented (up to second order average statistical properties) as the output of a linear dynamic system excited by independent or uncorrelated random  signals  ('white  noise').  This  is  a  standard  trick  in  the engineering applications of the Wiener theory [2-7]. The approach taken here differs from the conventional one only in the way  in  which  linear  dynamic  systems  are  described.  We  shall emphasize  the  concepts  of state and state  transition; in  other words, linear systems will be specified by systems of first-order difference  (or  differential)  equations.    This  point  of  view  is

natural  and  also  necessary  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  the simplifications mentioned under (5).

(7) Solution  of the  Wiener  Problem. With  the  state-transition method,  a  single  derivation  covers  a  large  variety  of  problems: growing and infinite memory filters, stationary and nonstationary statistics, etc.; difficulty  (3)  disappears.  Having  guessed  the 'state'  of  the  estimation  (i.e.,  filtering  or  prediction)  problem correctly,  one  is  led  to  a  nonlinear  difference  (or  differential) equation for the covariance matrix of the optimal estimation error. This is vaguely analogous to the Wiener-Hopf equation. Solution of the equation for the covariance matrix starts at the time t 0 when the first  observation is taken; at each later time t the  solution  of the  equation  represents  the  covariance  of  the  optimal  prediction error given observations in the interval ( t 0 , t ) . From the covariance matrix  at  time t we obtain  at  once,  without  further  calculations, the coefficients (in general, time-varying) characterizing the optimal linear filter.

(8) The  Dual  Problem. The  new  formulation  of  the  Wiener problem  brings  it  into  contact  with  the  growing  new  theory  of control  systems  based  on  the  'state'  point  of  view  [17-24].  It turns out, surprisingly, that the Wiener problem is the dual of the noise-free  optimal  regulator  problem,  which  has  been  solved previously by the author, using the state-transition method to great advantage [18, 23, 24]. The mathematical background of the two problems is identical-this has been suspected all along, but until now the analogies have never been made explicit.

(9) Applications. The  power  of  the  new  method  is  most  apparent  in  theoretical  investigations  and  in  numerical  answers  to complex practical problems. In the latter case, it is best to resort to machine  computation.  Examples  of  this  type  will  be  discussed later. To provide some  feel for applications, two standard examples  from  nonstationary  prediction  are  included;  in  these cases the solution of the nonlinear difference equation mentioned under (7) above can be obtained even in closed form.

For easy reference, the main results are displayed in the form of theorems. Only Theorems 3 and 4 are original. The next section and the Appendix serve mainly to review well-known material in a form suitable for the present purposes.

## Notation Conventions

Throughout  the  paper,  we  shall  deal  mainly  with discrete (or sampled) dynamic  systems;  in  other  words,  signals  will  be  observed  at  equally  spaced  points  in  time (sampling  instants). By suitable  choice  of  the  time  scale,  the  constant  intervals  between successive sampling instants (sampling periods) may be chosen as unity.  Thus  variables  referring  to  time,  such  as t,  t 0 , τ ,  T will always be integers. The restriction to discrete dynamic systems is not at all essential (at least from the engineering point of view); by using the discreteness, however, we can keep the mathematics rigorous  and  yet  elementary.  Vectors  will  be  denoted  by  small bold-face letters: a , b , ..., u , x , y , ... A vector or more precisely an n-vector is a set of n numbers x 1 , ... x n ; the x i are the co-ordinates or components of the vector x .

Matrices will be denoted by capital bold-face letters: A , B , Q , Φ , Ψ ,  …;  they  are m × n arrays  of  elements aij , bij , qij ,...  The transpose (interchanging rows and columns) of a matrix will be denoted  by  the  prime.  In  manipulating  formulas,  it  will  be convenient to regard a vector as a matrix with a single column.

Using the conventional definition of matrix multiplication, we write the scalar product of two n -vectors x , y as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  scalar  product  is  clearly a scalar, i.e., not a vector, quantity.

Similarly, the quadratic form associated with the n × n matrix Q is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We define the expression xy' where x' is an m -vector and y is an n -vector to be the m × n matrix with elements x i y j .

We write E ( x ) = E x for the expected value of the random vector x (see Appendix). It is usually convenient to omit the brackets after E. This  does  not  result  in  confusion  in  simple  cases  since constants and the operator E commute. Thus E xy' = matrix with elements E ( x i y j ); E x E y' = matrix with elements E ( x i ) E ( y j ) .

For  ease  of  reference,  a  list  of  the  principal  symbols  used  is given below.

## Optimal Estimates

t time in general, present time.

t 0 time at which observations start.

x

1

(

t

),

x

2

(

t

)

basic random variables.

y ( t )

observed random variable.

x

1

*(

t

1

|

t

)

optimal estimate of x 1 ( t 1 ) given y ( t 0 ), …, y ( t ).

L

loss function (non random function of its argument).

ε estimation error (random variable).

## Orthogonal Projections

Y ( t ) linear manifold generated by the random variables y ( t 0 ), …, y ( t ).

x ( t 1 | t ) orthogonal projection of x ( t 1 ) on Y ( t ).

x ~ ( t 1 | t ) component of x ( t 1 ) orthogonal to Y ( t ).

## Models for Random Processes

Φ ( t + 1; t ) transition matrix

Q ( t ) covariance of random excitation

## Solution of the Wiener Problem

x ( t ) basic random variable.

y ( t ) observed random variable.

Y ( t ) linear manifold generated by y ( t 0 ), …, y ( t ).

Z ( t ) linear manifold generated by y ~ ( t | t - 1).

x *( t 1 | t ) optimal estimate of x ( t 1 ) given Y ( t ).

x ~ ( t 1 | t ) error in optimal estimate of x ( t 1 ) given Y ( t ).

## Optimal Estimates

To have a concrete description or the type of problems to be studied,  consider  the  following  situation.  We  are  given  signal x 1 ( t ) and noise x 2 ( t ) . Only the sum y ( t ) = x 1 ( t ) + x 2 ( t ) can be observed. Suppose we have observed and know exactly the values of y ( t 0 ) , ..., y(t). What can we infer from this knowledge in regard to the (unobservable) value of the signal at t = t 1 , where t 1 may be less  than,  equal  to,  or  greater  than t ? If t 1 &lt; t, this  is  a datasmoothing  (interpolation) problem.  If t 1 = t, this is called filtering. If t 1 &gt; t, we have a prediction problem. Since our treatment  will be general enough  to  include these and  similar problems, we shall use hereafter the collective term estimation.

As  was  pointed  out  by  Wiener  [1],  the  natural  setting  of  the estimation problem belongs to the realm of probability theory and statistics.  Thus  signal,  noise,  and  their  sum  will  be  random variables,  and  consequently  they  may  be  regarded  as  random processes.  From  the  probabilistic  description  of  the  random processes  we  can  determine  the  probability  with  which  a  particular sample of the signal and noise will occur. For any given set of measured values η ( t 0 ), ..., η ( t ) of the random variable y ( t ) one  can  then  also  determine,  in  principle,  the  probability  of simultaneous  occurrence  of  various  values ξ 1 (t)  of  the  random variable x 1 ( t 1 ) . This  is  the  conditional  probability  distribution function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Evidently, F ( ξ 1 )  represents  all  the  information  which  the  measurement of the random variables y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t ) has conveyed about the random variable x 1 ( t 1 ). Any statistical estimate of the random variable x 1 ( t 1 )  will  be  some  function  of  this  distribution  and therefore a (nonrandom) function of the random variables y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t ) . This statistical estimate is denoted by X 1 ( t 1 | t ) , or by just X 1 ( t 1 ) or X 1 when  the  set  of  observed  random  variables  or  the  time  at which the estimate is required are clear from context.

Suppose now that X 1 is given as a fixed function of the random variables y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t ). Then X 1 is itself a random variable and its actual value is known whenever the actual values of y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t ) are known. In general, the actual value of X 1 ( t 1 ) will be different from the (unknown) actual value of x 1 ( t 1 ). To arrive at a rational way of determining X 1 , it is natural to assign a penalty or loss for incorrect estimates. Clearly, the loss should be a (i) positive, (ii) nondecreasing function of the estimation error ε = x 1 ( t 1 ) -X 1 ( t 1 ) . Thus we define a loss function by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Some  common examples  of  loss  functions  are: L ( ε )  = a ε 2 , a ε 4 , a |ε| , a [1 - exp(ε 2 )], etc., where a is a positive constant.

One (but  by  no  means  the  only)  natural  way  of  choosing  the random variable X 1 is to require that this choice should minimize the average loss or risk

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the first expectation on the right-hand side of (3) does not depend on the choice of X 1 but only on y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t ), it is clear that minimizing (3) is equivalent to minimizing

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under just slight additional assumptions, optimal estimates can be characterized in a simple way.

Theorem 1. Assume that L is of type (2) and that the conditional distribution function F ( ξ ) defined by (1) is:

( A ) symmetric about the mean ξ :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( B ) convex for ξ ≤ ξ :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all ξ 1 , ξ 2 ≤  ξ and 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1

Then the  random  variable  x 1 *( t 1 | t ) which  minimizes  the  average loss (3) is the conditional expectation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: As  pointed  out  recently  by  Sherman  [25],  this  theorem follows  immediately  from  a  well-known  lemma  in  probability theory.

Corollary. If  the  random  processes { x 1 ( t )},  { x 2 ( t )},  and  { y ( t )} are gaussian, Theorem 1 holds.

Proof: By Theorem 5, ( A ) (see Appendix), conditional distributions  on  a  gaussian  random  process  are  gaussian.  Hence  the  requirements of Theorem 1 are always satisfied.

In  the  control  system  literature,  this  theorem  appears  sometimes  in  a  form  which  is  more  restrictive  in  one  way  and  more general in another way:

Theorem  l-a. If  L ( ε )  = ε 2 , then Theorem  1  is  true  without  assumptions ( A ) and ( B ).

Proof: Expand the conditional expectation (4):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and differentiate with respect to X 1 ( t 1 ). This is not a completely rigorous argument; for a simple rigorous proof see Doob [15], pp. 77-78.

Remarks. ( a ) As far as the author is aware, it is not known what is the most general class of random processes { x 1 ( t )}, { x 2 ( t )} for which  the conditional distribution function satisfies the requirements of Theorem 1.

( b ) Aside from the note of Sherman, Theorem 1 apparently has never  been  stated  explicitly  in  the  control  systems  literature.  In fact, one finds many statements to the effect that loss functions of the  general  type  (2)  cannot  be  conveniently  handled  mathematically.

( c ) In  the  sequel,  we  shall  be  dealing  mainly  with  vectorvalued random variables. In that case, the estimation problem is stated as: Given a vector-valued random process { x ( t )} and observed  random  variables y ( t 0 ),  ..., y ( t ), where y ( t ) = Mx ( t )  ( M being  a  singular  matrix;  in  other  words,  not  all  co-ordinates  of x ( t ) can be observed), find an estimate X ( t 1 ) which minimizes the expected  loss E [ L ( || x ( t 1 )  -X ( t 1 ) || )], ||  || being  the  norm  of  a vector.

Theorem 1 remains true in the vector case also, provided we re-  quire  that  the  conditional  distribution  function  of  the n coordi- nates of the vector x ( t 1 ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be symmetric with respect to the n variables ξ 1 -ξ 1 , …, ξ n -ξ n and  convex  in  the  region  where  all  of  these  variables  are negative.

## Orthogonal Projections

The explicit calculation of the optimal estimate as a function of the  observed  variables  is,  in  general,  impossible.  There  is  an important exception: The processes { x 1 ( t )}, { x 2 ( t )} are gaussian.

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  attempt  to  get  an  optimal  estimate under the restriction L ( ε ) = ε 2 and the additional requirement that the estimate be a linear function of  the  observed  random variables, we get an estimate which is identical with the optimal estimate in the gaussian case, without the assumption of linearity or quadratic loss function. This shows that results obtainable by linear  estimation  can  be  bettered  by  nonlinear  estimation  only when (i) the random processes are nongaussian and even then (in view of Theorem 5, ( C )) only (ii)  by  considering  at  least  thirdorder probability distribution functions.

In the special cases just mentioned, the explicit solution of the estimation problem is most easily understood with the help of a geometric picture. This is the subject of the present section.

Consider the (real-valued) random variables y ( t 0 ), …, y ( t ). The set of all linear combinations of these random variables with real coefficients

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

forms a vector space (linear manifold) which we denote by Y ( t ). We regard, abstractly, any expression of the form (6) as 'point' or 'vector' in Y ( t );  this use of the word 'vector' should not be confused, of course, with 'vector-valued' random variables, etc. Since we do not want to fix the value of t (i.e., the total number of  possible  observations), Y ( t )  should  be  regarded  as  a  finitedimensional subspace of the space of all possible observations.

Given any two vectors u, v in Y ( t )  (i.e.,  random variables expressible in the form (6)), we say that u and v are orthogonal if Euv = 0.  Using  the  Schmidt  orthogonalization procedure, as described  for  instance  by  Doob  [15],  p.  151,  or  by  Loève  [16],  p. 459, it is easy to select an orthonormal basis in Y ( t ).  By this  is meant a set of vectors e t 0 ,  …, e t in Y ( t )  such  that  any  vector  in Y ( t ) can be expressed as a unique linear combination of e t 0 , …, e t and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus any vector x in Y ( t ). is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and so the coefficients ai can be immediately determined with the aid of (7):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows further that any random variable x (not necessarily in Y ( t )) can be uniquely decomposed into two parts: a part x in Y ( t ) and a part x ~ orthogonal to Y ( t ) (i.e., orthogonal to every vector in ' Y ( t )). In fact, we can write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus x is uniquely determined by equation (9) and is obviously a  vector  in Y ( t ).  Therefore x ~ is  also  uniquely  determined;  it remains to check that it is orthogonal to Y ( t ):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now the co-ordinates of x with respect to the basis e t 0 , …, e t, are given either in the form i Exe (as in (8)) or in the form Exei (as in (9)). Since the co-ordinates are unique, Exei = i Exe ( i = t 0 ,  ..., t ); hence i Exe ~ =  0  and x ~ is  orthogonal  to  every  base  vector e i ; and therefore  to Y ( t ).  We  call x the orthogonal  projection of x on Y ( t ).

There is another way in which the orthogonal projection can be characterized: x is that vector in Y ( t ) (i.e., that linear function of the  random  variables y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t )) which  minimizes  the  quadratic  loss  function.  In  fact,  if w is  any  other  vector  in Y ( t ),  we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since x ~ is  orthogonal to every vector in Y ( t )  and in particular to w x -we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This shows that, if w also minimizes the quadratic loss, we must have 0 ) ( 2 = -w E x which means that the random variables x and w are  equal  (except  possibly  for  a  set  of  events whose probability is zero).

These results may be summarized as follows:

Theorem 2. Let { x ( t )}, { y ( t )} random processes with zero mean ( i.e., Ex ( t ) = Ey ( t ) = 0 for all t ). We observe y ( t 0 ), …, y ( t ). If either

- ( A ) the random processes { x ( t )}, { y ( t )} are gaussian; or
- ( B ) the optimal estimate is restricted to be a linear function of the observed random variables and L ( ε ) = ε 2 ;

then

These  results  are  well-known  though  not  easily  accessible  in the  control  systems  literature.  See  Doob  [15],  pp.  75-78,  or Pugachev [26]. It is sometimes convenient to denote the orthogonal projection by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The notation E ˆ is  motivated by part ( b ) of the theorem: If the stochastic  processes  in  question  are  gaussian,  then  orthogonal projection is actually identical with conditional expectation.

Proof. ( A ) This is a direct consequence of the remarks in connection with (10).

( B ) Since x ( t ) ,  y ( t ) are random variables with zero mean, it is clear  from  formula  (9)  that  the  orthogonal  part x ~ ( t 1 | t )  of  x( t 1 ) with respect to the linear manifold Y ( t ) is also a random variable with zero mean. Orthogonal random variables with zero mean are uncorrelated; if they are also gaussian then (by Theorem 5 ( B )) they are independent. Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remarks. ( d ) A  rigorous  formulation  of  the  contents  of  this section  as t → ∞ requires  some  elementary  notions  from  the theory of Hilbert space. See Doob [15] and Loève [16 ].

- ( e ) The physical interpretation of Theorem 2 is largely a matter of  taste.  If  we  are  not  worried  about  the  assumption  of  gaussianness, part ( A ) shows that the orthogonal projection is the optimal  estimate  for  all  reasonable  loss  functions.  If  we  do  worry about  gaussianness,  even  if  we  are  resigned  to  consider  only linear estimates, we know that orthogonal projections are not the optimal  estimate  for  many  reasonable  loss  functions.  Since  in practice it is difficult to ascertain to what degree of approximation a random process of physical origin is gaussian, it is hard to decide  whether  Theorem  2  has  very  broad  or  very  limited  significance.

( f ) Theorem  2  is  immediately  generalized  for  the  case  of vector-valued  random  variables.  In  fact,  we  define  the  linear manifold Y ( t ) generated by y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t ) to be the set of all linear combinations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of all m co-ordinates of each of the random vectors y ( t 0 ), …, y ( t ). The rest of the story proceeds as before.

( g ) Theorem 2 states in effect that the optimal estimate under conditions ( A ) or ( B ) is a linear combination of all previous observations. In other words, the optimal estimate can be regarded as the output of a linear filter, with the input being the actually occurring values of the observable random variables; Theorem 2 gives  a  way  of  computing  the  impulse  response  of  the  optimal filter. As pointed out before, knowledge of this impulse response is  not  a  complete  solution  of  the  problem;  for  this  reason,  no explicit formulas for the calculation of the impulse response will be given.

## Models for Random Processes

In dealing with physical phenomena, it is not sufficient to give an empirical description but one must have also some idea of the underlying causes. Without being able to separate in some sense causes and effects, i.e., without the assumption of causality, one can hardly hope for useful results.

It  is  a  fairly  generally  accepted  fact  that  primary  macroscopic sources  of  random  phenomena  are  independent  gaussian  processes. 5  A well-known example is the noise voltage produced in a resistor due to thermal agitation. In most cases, observed random phenomena are not describable by independent random variables. The  statistical  dependence  (correlation)  between  random  signals observed at different times is usually explained by the presence of a  dynamic  system  between  the  primary  random  source  and  the observer. Thus a random function of time may be thought of as the output  of  a  dynamic  system  excited  by  an  independent  gaussian random process.

An important property of gaussian random signals is that they remain gaussian after passing through a linear system (Theorem 5 ( A )). Assuming independent gaussian primary random sources, if the observed random signal is also gaussian, we may assume that the dynamic system between the observer and the primary source is linear. This  conclusion  may  be  forced  on  us  also  because  of lack  of  detailed  knowledge  of  the  statistical  properties  of  the observed random signal: Given any random process with known first  and  second-order  averages,  we  can  find  a  gaussian  random process with the same properties (Theorem 5 ( C )). Thus gaussian distributions  and  linear  dynamics  are  natural,  mutually  plausible assumptions particularly when the statistical data are scant.

How is a dynamic system (linear or nonlinear) described? The fundamental concept is the notion of the state. By this is meant, intuitively,  some  quantitative  information  (a  set  of  numbers,  a function, etc.) which is the least amount of data one has to know about the past behavior of the system in order to predict its future behavior.  The  dynamics  is  then  described  in  terms  of state transitions, i.e.,  one  must  specify  how  one  state  is  transformed into another as time passes.

A linear dynamic system may be described in general by the vector differential equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x is an n -vector, the state of the system (the components x i of x are  called state  variables ); u ( t ) is  an m -vector  ( m ≤ n ) representing  the inputs to  the  system; F ( t )  and D ( t )  are n × n, respectively, n × m matrices. If all coefficients of F ( t ), D ( t ), M ( t ) are  constants,  we  say  that  the  dynamic  system  (12)  is timeinvariant or stationary. Finally, y ( t ) is  a p-vector denoting  the outputs of the system; M ( t ) is an n × p matrix; p ≤ n

The physical interpretation of (12) has been discussed in detail elsewhere [18, 20, 23]. A look at the block diagram in Fig. 1 may be helpful. This is not an ordinary but a matrix block diagram (as revealed by the fat lines indicating signal flow). The integrator in

.

Fig  1.  Matrix  block  diagram  of  the  general  linear  continuous-dynamic system

<!-- image -->

---

5   The  probability  distributions  will  be  gaussian  because  macroscopic random  effects  may  be  thought  of  as  the  superposition  of  very  many microscopic  random  effects;  under  very  general  conditions,  such  aggregate effects tend to be gaussian, regardless of the statistical properties of the microscopic effects. The assumption of independence in this context is  motivated  by  the  fact  that  microscopic  phenomena  tend  to  take  place much  more  rapidly  than  macroscopic  phenomena;  thus  primary  random sources would appear to be independent on a macroscopic time scale.

Fig.  1  actually  stands  for n integrators  such  that  the  output  of each  is  a  state  variable; F ( t )  indicates  how  the  outputs  of  the integrators are fed back to the inputs of the integrators. Thus f ij ( t ) is the coefficient with which the output of the j th integrator is fed back to the input of the i th integrator. It is not hard to relate this formalism to  more conventional methods of linear system analysis.

If we assume that the system (12) is stationary and that u ( t ) is constant during each sampling period, that is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then  (12)  can  be  readily  transformed  into  the  more  convenient discrete form.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where [18, 20]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig  2.  Matrix  block  diagram  of  the  general  linear  discrete-dynamic system

<!-- image -->

See Fig. 2. One could also express exp F τ in closed form using Laplace transform methods [18, 20, 22, 24]. If u ( t ) satisfies (13) but the system (12) is nonstationary, we can write analogously

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

but of course now Φ ( t +  1; t ), ∆ ( t )  cannot be expressed in general in closed form. Equations of type (14) are encountered frequently  also  in  the  study  of  complicated  sampled-data  systems [22]. See Fig. 2

Φ ( t + 1; t ) is the transition matrix of the system (12) or (14). The notation Φ ( t 2 ; t 1 ) ( t 2 , t 1 =  integers) indicates transition from time t 1 to time t 2 . Evidently Φ ( t ; t ) = I = unit matrix. If the system (12) is stationary then Φ ( t + 1; t ) = Φ ( t + 1 -t ) = Φ (1) = const. Note also the product rule: Φ ( t ; s ) Φ ( s ; r ) = Φ ( t ; r ) and the inverse rule Φ -1 ( t ; s ) = Φ ( s ; t ) , where t,  s , r are integers. In a stationary system, Φ ( t ; τ ) = exp F ( t -τ ).

As a result of the preceding discussion, we shall represent random phenomena by the model

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  { u ( t )}  is  a  vector-valued,  independent,  gaussian  random process,  with  zero  mean,  which  is  completely  described  by  (in view of Theorem 5 ( C ))

E u ( t ) = 0 for all t; E u ( t ) u' ( s ) = 0 if t ≠ s E u ( t ) u' ( t ) = G ( t ).

Of course (Theorem 5 ( A )), x ( t )  is  then  also  a  gaussian  random process with zero mean, but it is no longer independent. In fact, if we consider (15) in the steady state (assuming it is a stable system), in other words, if we neglect the initial state x ( t 0 ), then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore if t ≥ s we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus  if  we  assume  a  linear  dynamic  model  and  know  the statistical properties of the gaussian random excitation, it is easy to  find  the  corresponding  statistical  properties  of  the  gaussian random process { x ( t )}.

In  real  life,  however,  the  situation  is  usually  reversed.  One  is given the covariance matrix E x ( t ) x' ( s ) (or rather, one attempts to estimate the matrix from limited statistical data) and the problem is to get (15) and the statistical properties of u ( t ). This is a subtle and  presently  largely  unsolved  problem  in  experimentation  and data reduction. As  in the vast majority of the engineering literature  on  the  Wiener  problem,  we  shall  find  it  convenient  to start with the model (15) and regard the problem of obtaining the model itself as a separate question. To be sure, the two problems should be  optimized  jointly  if  possible;  the  author  is  not  aware, however, of any study of the joint optimization problem.

In summary, the following assumptions are made about random processes:

Physical  random  phenomena  may  be  thought  of as due  to primary random sources exciting dynamic systems. The primary sources are assumed to be independent gaussian random processes with zero mean; the dynamic systems will be linear. The random processes are therefore described by models such as (15). The  question  of  how  the  numbers  specifying  the  model  are obtained from experimental data will not be considered.

## Solution of the Wiener problem

Let us now define the principal problem of the paper.

Problem I. Consider the dynamic model

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where u ( t )  is an  independent  gaussian  random  process  of  nvectors with zero mean, x ( t ) is an n-vector, y ( t ) is a p-vector ( p ≤ n ), Φ ( t +  1; t ), M ( t ) are  n × n,  resp.  p × n,  matrices  whose elements are nonrandom functions of time.

Given  the  observed  values  of y ( t 0 ),  ..., y ( t ) find  an  estimate x *( t 1 | t ) of x ( t 1 ) which  minimizes  the  expected  loss .  (See  Fig.  2, where ∆ ( t ) = I .)

This problem includes as a special case the problems of filtering,  prediction,  and  data  smoothing  mentioned  earlier.  It  includes also the problem of reconstructing all the state variables of a linear dynamic system from noisy observations of some of the state variables ( p &lt; n! ).

From Theorem 2a we know that the solution of Problem I is simply  the  orthogonal  projection  of x ( t 1 )  on  the  linear  manifold Y ( t ) generated by the observed random variables. As remarked in the Introduction, this is to be accomplished by means of a linear (not necessarily stationary!) dynamic system of the general form (14). With this in mind, we proceed as follows.

Assume that y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t - 1) have been measured, i.e., that Y ( t -  1)  is  known.  Next,  at  time t, the  random  variable y ( t ) is measured.  As  before  let y ~ ( t | t -  1)  be  the  component  of y ( t ) orthogonal  to Y ( t -  1).  If y ~ ( t | t -  1) ≡ 0,  which  means  that  the values of all components of this random vector are zero for almost every possible event, then Y ( t ) is obviously the same as Y ( t - 1) and therefore the measurement of y ( t ) does not convey any additional  information.  This  is  not  likely  to  happen  in  a  physically meaningful  situation.  In  any  case, y ~ ( t | t -  1)  generates  a  linear manifold  (possibly  0)  which  we  denote  by Z ( t ) . By  definition, Y ( t -1) and Z ( t ) taken together are the same manifold as Y ( t ), and every vector in Z ( t ) is orthogonal to every vector in Y ( t -1).

Assuming by induction that x *( t 1 - 1 | t -  1) is known, we can write:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last line is obtained using (16).

Let t 1 = t + s , where s is any integer. If s ≥ 0, then u ( t l - 1) is independent of Y ( t -1). This is because u ( t l - 1) = u ( t + s - 1) is then independent of u ( t -  2), u ( t -  3),  ...  and  therefore  by  (1617), independent of y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t - 1), hence independent of Y ( t -1). Since, for all t, u ( t 0 ) has zero mean by assumption, it follows that u ( t l - 1) ( s ≥ 0) is orthogonal to Y ( t -1). Thus if s ≥ 0, the second  term  on  the  right-hand  side  of  (18)  vanishes;  if s &lt;  0, considerable  complications  result  in  evaluating  this  term.  We shall consider only the case t l ≥ t. Furthermore, it will suffice to consider in detail only the case t l = t + 1 since the other cases can be easily reduced to this one.

The last term in (18) must be a linear operation on the random variable y ~ ( t | t - 1):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ *( t )  is  an n × p matrix,  and  the  star  refers  to  'optimal filtering'.

The  component  of y ( t )  lying  in Y ( t -1)  is y ( t | t -  1)  = M ( t ) x *( t | t - 1). Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining (18-20) (see Fig. 3) we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus  optimal  estimation  is  performed  by  a  linear  dynamic system of the same form as (14). The state of the estimator is the previous  estimate,  the  input  is  the  last  measured  value  of  the observable random variable y ( t ) , the transition matrix is given by (22). Notice that physical realization of the optimal filter requires only ( i ) the model of the random process ( ii ) the operator ∆ *( t ).

The  estimation  error  is  also  governed  by  a  linear  dynamic system. In fact,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig. 3   Matrix block diagram of optimal filter

<!-- image -->

Thus Φ * is also the transition matrix of the linear dynamic system governing the error.

From  (23)  we  obtain  at  once  a  recursion  relation  for  the  covariance matrix P *( t ) of the optimal error x ~ ( t | t - 1). Noting that u ( t ) is independent of x ( t ) and therefore of x ~ ( t | t - 1) we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Q ( t ) = E u ( t ) u' ( t ).

There remains the problem of obtaining an explicit formula for ∆ * (and thus also for Φ *). Since,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is orthogonal to y ~ ( t | t - 1), it follows that by (19) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Noting that x ( t + 1| t -  1)  is  orthogonal to Z ( t ) , the definition of P ( t ) given earlier, and (17), it follows further

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, since u ( t ) is independent of x ( t ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now the matrix M ( t ) P *( t ) M' ( t )will be positive definite and hence invertible whenever P *( t ) is positive definite, provided that none of  the  rows  of M ( t )  are  linearly  dependent  at  any  time,  in  other words, that none of the observed scalar random variables y l ( t ), ..., ym ( t ), is a linear combination of the others. Under these circumstances we get finally:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since observations start at t 0 , x ~ ( t 0 | t 0 - 1) = x ( t 0 ); to begin the iterative evaluation of P *( t ) by means of equation (24), we must obviously  specify P *( t 0 )  = E x ( t 0 ) x' ( t 0 ).  Assuming  this  matrix  is positive  definite,  equation  (25)  then  yields ∆ *( t 0 );  equation  (22) Φ * ( t 0 + 1; t 0 ) , and equation (24) P *( t 0 + 1), completing the cycle. If now Q ( t ) is positive definite, then all the P *( t ) will be positive definite and the requirements in deriving (25) will be satisfied at each step.

Now we remove  the  restriction  that t 1 = t +  1.  Since u ( t )  is orthogonal to Y ( t ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence if Φ ( t + 1; t ) has an inverse Φ ( t ; t + 1) (which is always the case  when Φ is  the  transition  matrix  of  a  dynamic  system describable by a differential equation) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If t 1 ≥ t + 1, we first observe by repeated application of (16) that x ( t + s ) = Φ ( t + s ; t + 1) x ( t + 1)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since u ( t + s - 1), …, u ( t + 1) are all orthogonal to Y ( t ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If s &lt; 0, the results are similar, but x * ( t -s | t )  will  have  (1  s )( n - p ) co-ordinates.

The  results  of  this  section  may  be  summarized  as  follows: Theorem 3. ( Solution of the Wiener Problem )

Consider Problem I. The optimal estimate x * ( t + 1 | t ) of x ( t + 1) given y ( t 0 ), ..., y ( t ) is generated by the linear dynamic system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The estimation error is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The covariance matrix of the estimation error is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The expected quadratic loss is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  matrices ∆ *( t ), Φ *( t +  1; t ), P *( t ) are  generated  by  the recursion relations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order  to carry  out the iterations,  one  must  specify  the covariance P *( t 0 ) of x ( t 0 ) and  the  covariance Q ( t ) of u ( t ). Finally, for any s ≥ 0, if Φ is invertible

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that the estimate x * ( t + s | t ) ( s ≥ 0) is also given by a linear dynamic system of the type (21).

Remarks. ( h ) Eliminating ∆ * and Φ * from (28-30), a nonlinear difference equation is obtained for P *( t ):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This  equation  is  linear  only  if M ( t )  is  invertible  but  then  the problem is trivial since all components of the random vector x ( t ) are observable P *( t + 1) = Q ( t ). Observe that equation (32) plays a role in the present theory analogous to that of the Wiener-Hopf equation in the conventional theory.

Once P *( t )  has  been computed via (32) starting at t = t 0 ,  the explicit  specification  of  the  optimal  linear  filter  is  immediately available  from  formulas  (29-30).  Of  course,  the  solution  of Equation (32), or of its differential-equation equivalent, is a much simpler task than solution of the Wiener-Hopf equation.

( i ) The  results  stated  in  Theorem  3  do  not  resolve  completely Problem I. Little has been said, for instance, about the physical significance  of  the  assumptions  needed  to  obtain  equation  (25), the  convergence  and  stability  of  the  nonlinear  difference  equation  (32),  the  stability  of  the  optimal  filter  (21),  etc.  This  can actually  be  done  in  a  completely  satisfactory  way,  but  must  be left to a future paper. In this connection, the principal guide and

tool turns out to be the duality theorem mentioned briefly in the next section. See [29].

- ( j )  By  letting  the  sampling  period  (equal  to  one  so  far)  approach zero, the method can be used to obtain the specification of a  differential  equation  for  the  optimal  filter.  To  do  this,  i.e.,  to pass from equation (14) to equation (12), requires computing the logarithm F * of the matrix Φ *. But this can be done only if Φ * is nonsingular-which  is  easily  seen not to  be  the  case.  This  is because it  is  sufficient  for  the  optimal  filter  to  have n -p state variables, rather than n, as the formalism of equation (22) would seem to imply. By appropriate modifications, therefore, equation (22) can be reduced to an equivalent set of only n -p equations whose transition matrix is nonsingular. Details of this type will be covered in later publications.
- ( k ) The dynamic system (21) is, in general, nonstationary. This is due to two things: (1) The time dependence of Φ ( t + 1; t ) and M ( t ); (2) the fact that the estimation starts at t = t 0 and improves as more data are accumulated. If Φ , M are constants, it can be shown that (21) becomes a stationary dynamic system in the limit t → ∞ . This is the case treated by the classical Wiener theory.
- ( l )  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  derivations  given  are  not  affected by  the  nonstationarity  of  the  model  for x ( t )  or  the  finiteness  of available  data.  In  fact,  as  far  as  the  author  is  aware,  the  only explicit recursion relations given before for the growing-memory filter  are  due to Blum [12]. However, his results are much more complicated than ours.

( m ) By inspection of Fig. 3 we see that the optimal filter is a feedback  system,  and  that  the  signal  after  the  first  summer  is white  noise  since y ~ ( t | t -  1)  is  obviously  an  orthogonal  random process. This corresponds to some well-known results in Wiener filtering, see, e.g., Smith [28], Chapter 6, Fig. 6-4. However, this is  apparently  the  first rigorous proof  that  every  Wiener  filter  is realizable  by  means  of  a  feedback  system.  Moreover,  it  will  be shown in another paper that such a filter is always stable, under very mild assumptions on the model (16-17). See [29].

## The Dual Problem

Let  us  now  consider  another  problem  which  is  conceptually very  different  from  optimal  estimation,  namely,  the  noise-free regulator problem. In the simplest cases, this is:

Problem II. Consider the dynamic system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x ( t ) is an n-vector, u ( t ) is an m-vector ( m ≤ n ) , Φ ˆ , M ˆ are n × n resp. n × m matrices whose elements are nonrandom functions  of  time.  Given  any  state x ( t ) at  time  t,  we  are  to  find  a sequence u ( t ),  ..., u ( T ) of  control  vectors  which  minimizes  the performance index

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where Q ˆ ( t ) is  a  positive  definite  matrix  whose  elements  are nonrandom functions of time. See Fig. 2, where ∆ = M ˆ and M = I .

Probabilistic  considerations  play  no  part  in  Problem  II;  it  is implicitly  assumed  that  every  state  variable  can  be  measured exactly at each instant t , t + 1, ..., T. It is customary to call T ≥ t the terminal time (it may be infinity).

The first general solution of the noise-free regulator problem is due to the author [18]. The main result is that the optimal control vectors u *( t )  are  nonstationary  linear  functions  of x ( t ).  After  a change in notation, the formulas of the Appendix, Reference [18] (see also Reference [23]) are as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under optimal control as given by (34), the 'closed-loop' equations for the system are (see Fig. 4)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the minimum performance index at time t is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The matrices ∆ ˆ *( t ), Φ ˆ *( t +  1; t ), P ˆ *( t ) are  determined  by the recursion relations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

t

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

)

P

*(

t

)

*(

t

+ 1;

Initially we must set P ˆ *( T ) = Q ˆ ( T + 1).

)

+

Q

ˆ

(

t

)



Fig. 4   Matrix block diagram of optimal controller

<!-- image -->

Comparing  equations  (35-37)  with  (28-30)  and  Fig.  3  with Fig.  4  we  notice  some  interesting  things  which  are  expressed precisely by

Theorem 4. ( Duality  Theorem ) Problem  I  and  Problem  II  are duals of each other in the following sense:

Let τ ≥ 0. Replace every matrix X ( t) = X ( t 0 + τ ) in (28-30) by X ˆ ' ( t )  = X ˆ ' ( T -τ ). Then One has (35-37). Conversely, replace every  matrix X ˆ ( T -τ ) in (35-37) by X' ( t 0 + τ ). Then  one  has (28-30).

Proof. Carry  out  the  substitutions.  For  ease  of  reference,  the dualities between the two problems are given in detail in Table 1.

## Table 1

## Problem I

- 1 x ( t ) (unobservable) state variables  of  random  process.
- 2 y ( t )  observed random variables.
- 3 t 0 first observation.
- 4 Φ ( t 0 + τ +1; t 0 + τ ) transition matrix.
- 5 P *( t 0 + τ ) covariance of optimized estimation error.
- 6 ∆ *( t 0 + τ )  weighting  of  observation  for  optimal  estimation.

7

- Φ *( t 0 + τ + 1; t 0 + τ ) transition matrix for optimal estimation error.
- 8 M ( t 0 + τ )  effect  of  state  on observation.
- 9 Q ( t 0 + τ ) covariance of random excitation.

## Problem II

- x ( t ) (observable) state variables of plant to be regulated.
- u ( t ) control variables

T last control action.

- Φ ˆ ( T -τ + 1; T -τ )    transition matrix.
- ∆ ˆ *( T -τ )    weighting     of state for optimal control.
- P ˆ *( T -τ )  matrix  of  quadratic form for performance index under optimal regulation.
- Φ ˆ *( T -τ + 1; T -τ )  transition  matrix  under  optimal regulation.
- Q ˆ ( T -τ )        matrix         of quadratic form defining error criterion.
- M ˆ ( T -τ )   effect  of  control vectors on state.

Remarks. ( n ) The mathematical significance of the duality between Problem I and Problem II is that both problems reduce to the solution of the Wiener-Hopf-like equation (32).

( o ) The physical significance of the duality is intriguing. Why are observations and control dual quantities?

(37)

t

Recent research [29] has shown that the essence of the Duality Theorem  lies  in  the  duality  of  constraints  at  the  output  (represented  by  the  matrix M ˆ ( t )  in  Problem  I)  and  constraints  at  the input (represented by the matrix M ˆ ( t ) in Problem II).

- ( p ) Applications of Wiener's methods to the solution of noisefree regulator problem have been known for a long time; see the recent textbook of Newton, Gould, and Kaiser [27]. However, the connections  between  the  two  problems,  and  in  particular  the duality, have apparently never been stated precisely before.
- ( q ) The duality theorem offers a powerful tool for developing more deeply the theory (as opposed to the computation) of Wiener filters,  as  mentioned  in  Remark  ( i ). This  will  be  published elsewhere [29].

## Applications

The power of the new approach to the Wiener problem, as expressed  by  Theorem  3,  is  most  obvious  when  the  data  of  the problem  are  given  in  numerical  form.  In  that  case,  one  simply performs  the  numerical  computations  required  by  (28-30).  Resuits of such calculations, in some cases of practical engineering interest, will be published elsewhere.

When the answers are desired in closed analytic form, the iterations  (28-30)  may  lead  to  very  unwieldy  expressions.  In  a  few cases, ∆ *  and Φ * can  be  put  into  'closed  form.'  Without  discussing here how (if at all) such closed forms can be obtained, we now give two examples indicative of the type of results to be expected.

Example  1. Consider  the  problem  mentioned  under  'Optimal Estimates.' Let x 1 ( t ) be the signal and x 2 ( t ) the noise. We assume the model:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The specific data for which we desire a solution of the estimation problem are as follows:

- 1 t 1 = t + 1; t 0 = 0
- 3 Eu 1 2 ( t ) = a 2 , Eu 2 ( t ) = b 2 , Eu 1 ( t ) u 2 ( t ) = 0 (for all t )
- 2 Ex 1 2 (0) = 0, i.e., x 1 (0) = 0
- 4 φ 11 ( t + 1; t ) = φ 11 = const.

A simple calculation shows that the following matrices satisfy the difference equations (28-30), for all t ≥ t 0 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since it was assumed that x 1 (0) = 0, neither x 1 (1) nor x 2 (1) can be  predicted  from  the  measurement  of y 1 (0).  Hence  the  measurement at time t = 0 is useless, which shows that we should set C (0) =  0.  This  fact,  with  the  iterations  (38),  completely  determines  the  function C ( t ). The  nonlinear  difference  equation  (38) plays the role of the Wiener-Hopf equation.

If b 2 / a 2 &lt;&lt;1, then C ( t ) ≈ 1 which is essentially pure prediction. If b 2 / a 2 &gt;&gt;1, then C ( t ) ≈ 0, and we depend mainly on x 1 *( t | t - 1) for the estimation of x 1 *( t +1 | t ) and assign only very small weight to the measurement y 1 ( t ) ; this is what one would expect when the measured data are very noisy.

To find the stationary Wiener filter, let t = ∞ on both sides of (38), solve the resulting quadratic equation in C ( ∞ ), etc.

In  any  case, x 2 *( t | t -  1)  =  0  at  all  times;  one  cannot  predict independent noise! This means that φ *12 can be set equal to zero. The  optimal  predictor  is  a  first-order  dynamic  system.  See Remark ( j ) .

Example 2. A number or particles leave the origin at time t 0 = 0 with  random  velocities;  after t =  0,  each  particle  moves  with  a constant (unknown) velocity. Suppose that the position of one of these  particles  is  measured,  the  data  being  contaminated  by stationary, additive, correlated noise. What is the optimal estimate of the position and velocity of the particle at the time of the last measurement?

Let x 1 ( t )  be  the  position  and x 2 ( t )  the  velocity  of  the  particle; x 3 ( t ) is the noise. The problem is then represented by the model,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the additional conditions

- 1 t 1 = t ; t 0 = 0
- 3 Eu 3 ( t ) = 0, Eu 3 2 ( t ) = b 2 .
- 2 Ex 1 2 (0) = Ex 2 (0) = 0, Ex 2 2 (0) = a 2 &gt; 0;
- 4 φ 33 ( t + 1; t ) = φ 33 = const.

According  to  Theorem  3, x *( t | t ) is calculated using the dynamic system (31).

First  we solve the problem of predicting the position and velocity of the particle one step ahead. Simple considerations show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is then easy to check by substitution into equations (28-30) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the correct expression for the covariance matrix of the prediction error x ~ ( t | t - 1) for all t ≥ 1, provided that we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It  is  interesting to  note that the results just obtained are valid also  when φ 33 depends  on t. This  is  true  also  in  Example  1.  In conventional  treatments  of  such  problems  there seems to  be  an essential  difference  between  the  cases  of  stationary  and  nonstationary  noise.  This  misleading  impression  created  by  the  conventional  theory  is  due  to  the  very  special methods used  in solving the Wiener-Hopf equation.

Introducing the abbreviation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and observing that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the matrices occurring in equation (31) and the covariance matrix of x ~ ( t | t ) are found after simple calculations.  We have, for all t ≥ 0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To  gain  some  insight  into  the  behavior  of  this  system,  let  us examine  the  limiting  case t → ∞ of  a  large  number  of  observations. Then C 1 ( t ) obeys approximately the differential equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using (39), we get further,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus  as  the  number  of  observations  becomes  large,  we  depend almost exclusively on x 1 *( t | t ) and x 2 *( t | t ) to estimate x 1 *( t + 1 | t + 1)  and x 2 *( t +  1 | t +  1).  Current  observations  are  used  almost exclusively to estimate the noise

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One would of course expect something like this since the problem is analogous to fitting a straight line to an increasing number of points.

As a second check on the reasonableness of the results given, observe that the case t &gt;&gt; 1 is essentially the same as prediction based on continuous observations. Setting φ 33 = 0, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which  is  identical  with  the  result  obtained  by  Shinbrot  [11], Example  1,  and  Solodovnikov  [14],  Example  2,  in  their  treatment of the Wiener problem in the finite-length, continuous-data case, using an approach entirely different from ours.

## Conclusions

This paper formulates and solves the Wiener problem from the 'state' point of view. On the one hand, this leads to a very general  treatment  including  cases  which  cause  difficulties  when  attacked by other methods. On the other hand, the Wiener problem is  shown  to  be  closely  connected  with  other  problems  in  the theory  of  control.  Much  remains  to  be  done  to  exploit  these connections.

## References

- 1    N.  Wiener,  'The  Extrapolation,  Interpolation  and  Smoothing  of Stationary  Time  Series,'  John  Wiley  &amp;  Sons,  Inc.,  New  York,  N.Y., 1949.
- 2  L. A. Zadeh and J. R. Ragazzini, 'An Extension of Wiener's Theory of Prediction,' Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 21, 1950, pp. 645-655.
- 3  H. W. Bode and C. E. Shannon, 'A Simplified Derivation of Linear Least-Squares Smoothing and Prediction Theory,' Proceedinqs IRE, vol. 38, 1950, pp. 417-425.
- 4    R.  C.  Booton,  'An  Optimization  Theory  for  Time-Varying  Linear Systems With Nonstationary Statistical Inputs,' Proceedings IRE, vol. 40, 1952, pp. 977-981.
- 5    J.  H.  Laning  and  R.  H.  Battin,  'Random  Processes  in  Automatic Control,' McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1956.
- 6    W.  B.  Davenport,  Jr.,  and  W.  L.  Root,  'An  Introduction  to  the Theory  of Random  Signals  and  Noise,'  McGraw-Hill  Book  Company, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1958.
- 7    S.  Darlington,  'Linear  Least-Squares  Smoothing  and  Prediction, With Applications,' Bell System Tech. Journal, vol.  37,  1958,  pp.12211294.
- 8    G.  Franklin,  'The  Optimum  Synthesis  of  Sampled-Data  Systems' Doctoral dissertation, Dept. of Elect. Engr., Columbia University, 1955.
- 9    A.  B.  Lees,  'Interpolation  and  Extrapolation  of Sampled  Data,' Trans. IRE Prof. Grou.p on Information Theory, IT-2, 1956, pp. 173-175.
- 10    R.  C.  Davis.  'On  the  Theory  of Prediction  of  Nonstationary Stochastic  Processes,' Journal  of  Applied  Physics, vol.  23.  1952,  pp. 1047-1053.
- 11  M. Shinbrot, 'Optimization of Tirne-Varying Linear Systems With Nonstationary Inputs,' TRANS. ASME, vol. 80, 1958. pp. 457-462.
- 12    M.  Blum,  'Recursion  Formulas  for  Growing  Memory  Digital Filters,' Trans. IRE Prof. Group on Information Theory. IT-4. 1958, pp. 24-30.
- 13    V.  S.  Pugachev,  'The  Use  of Canonical  Expansions  of Random Functions in Determining an Optimum Linear System,' Automatics and Remote Control (USSR), vol. 17, 1956, pp. 489-499; translation pp. 545556.
- 14  V. V. Solodovnikov and A. M. Batkov. 'On the Theory of SelfOptimizing Systems (in German and Russian),' Proc. Heidelberg Conference on Automatic Control, 1956. pp. 308-323.
- 15  J. L. Doob, 'Stochastic Processes,' John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1955.
- 16    M.  Loève,  'Probability  Theory,'  Van  Nostrand  Company,  Inc., New York, N. Y., 1955.
- 17  R. E. Bellman, I. Glicksberg, and 0. A. Gross, 'Some Aspects of the  Mathematical  Theory  of Control  Processes,'  RAND  Report  R-313, 1958, 244 pp.
- 18  R. E. Kalman and R. W. Koepcke, 'Optimal Synthesis of Linear Sampling  Control  Systems  Using  Generalized  Performance  Indexes,' TRANS. ASME, vol. 80, 1958, pp. 1820-1826.
- 19    J.  E.  Bertram,  'Effect  of Quantization  in  Sampled-Feedback Systems,' Trans. AlEE, vol. 77, II, 1958, pp. 177-182.
- 20  R. E. Kalman and J. E. Bertram, 'General Synthesis Procedure for Computer  Control  of Single  and  Multi-Loop  Linear  Systems' Trans. AlEE, vol. 77, II, 1958, pp. 602-609.
- 21    C.  W.  Merriam,  III,  'A  Class  of Optimum  Control  Systems,' Journal of the Franklin Institute, vol. 267, 1959, pp. 267-281.
- 22    R.  E.  Kalman  and  J.  E.  Bertram,  'A  Unified  Approach  to  the Theory of Sampling Systems,' Journal of the Franklin Institute, vol. 267, 1959, pp. 405-436.
- 23    R.  E.  Kalman  and  R.  W.  Koepcke,  'The  Role  of Digital  Computers in  the  Dynamic  Optimization  of Chemical  Reactors,' Proc. Western Joint Computer Conference, 1959, pp. 107-116.
- 24    R.  E.  Kalman,  'Dynamic  Optimization  of Linear  Control  Systems, I. Theory,' to appear.
- 25  S. Sherman, 'Non-Mean-Square Error Criteria,' Trans. IRE Prof. Group on Information Theory, IT-4, 1958, pp. 125-126.
- 26  V. S. Pugachev, 'On a Possible General Solution of the Problem of Determining  Optimum  Dynamic  Systems,' Automatics and  Remote Control (USSR), vol. 17, 1956, pp. 585-589.
- 27    G.  C.  Newton,  Jr.,  L.  A.  Gould,  and  J.  F.  Kaiser,  'Analytical Design  of Linear  Feedback  Controls,'  John  Wiley  &amp;  Sons,  Inc.,  New York, N. Y., 1957.
- 28  0. J. M. Smith, 'Feedback Control Systems,' McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1958.
- 29    R.  E.  Kalman,  'On  the  General  Theory  of Control  Systems,' Proceedings First International Conference on Automatic Control, Moscow, USSR, 1960.

## A P P E N D I X RANDOM PROCESSES:  BASIC CONCEPTS

For convenience of the reader, we review here some elementary definitions  and  facts  about  probability  and  random  processes. Everything  is  presented  with  the  utmost  possible  simplicity;  for greater depth and breadth, consult Laning and Battin [5] or Doob [15].

A random variable is  a  function  whose  values  depend  on  the outcome of a chance event. The values of a random variable may be any convenient mathematical entities; real or complex numbers, vectors, etc. For simplicity, we shall consider here only real-valued  random  variables,  but  this  is  no  real  restriction. Random variables will be denoted by x, y, ... and their values by ξ , η , …. Sums, products, and functions of random variables are also random variables.

A  random  variable x can  be  explicitly  defined  by  stating  the probability  that x is  less  than  or  equal  to  some  real  constant ξ . This is expressed symbolically by writing

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

F x ( ξ ) is called the probability distribution function of the random variable x. When F x ( ξ )  is  differentiable  with  respect  to ξ ,  then f x ( ξ ) = dF x ( ξ )/ d ξ is called the probability density function of x.

The expected value ( mathematical expectation, statistical average,  ensemble  average,  mean, etc.,  are  commonly  used synonyms) of any nonrandom function g ( x ) of a random variable x is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As indicated, it is often convenient to omit the brackets after the symbol E. A sequence of random variables (finite or infinite)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is called a discrete (or discrete-parameter ) random (or stochastic ) process. One  particular  set  of  observed  values  of  the  random process (41)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  called  a realization (or  a sample function) of  the  process.  Intuitively,  a  random  process  is  simply  a  set  of  random  variables which are indexed in such a way as to bring the notion of time into the picture.

A random process is uncorrelated if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If, furthermore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then the random process is orthogonal. Any uncorrelated random process  can  be  changed  into  orthogonal  random  process  by  replacing x ( t ) by x' ( t ) = x ( t ) -Ex ( t ) since then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It  is  useful  to  remember that, if a random process is orthogonal, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If x is a vector-valued random variable with components x 1 , …, x n (which are of course random variables), the matrix

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is called the covariance matrix of x.

A random process  may  be  specified  explicitly  by  stating  the probability  of  simultaneous  occurrence  of  any  finite  number  of events of the type

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Fx ( t 1), ..., x ( tn ) is  called  the joint  probability  distribution function of  the  random  variables x ( t 1 ),  …, x ( t n ). The joint probability density function is then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

provided  the  required  derivatives  exist.  The  expected  value Eg [ x ( t 1 ), …, x ( t n )] of any nonrandom function of n random variables is defined by an n -fold integral analogous to (40).

A random process is independent if for any finite t 1 ≠ … ≠ t n , (43) is equal to the product of the first-order distributions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If  a  set  of  random  variables  is  independent,  then  they  are  obviously also uncorrelated. The converse is not true in general. For a set of more than 2 random variables to be independent, it is not sufficient that any pair of random variables be independent.

Frequently it is of interest to consider the probability distribution of a random variable x ( t n +  1 ) of a random process given the actual  values ξ ( t 1 ),  …, ξ ( t n ) with  which  the  random  variables x ( t 1 ), …, x ( t n ) have occurred. This is denoted by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is called  the conditional  probability  distribution  function of x ( t n + 1 ) given x ( t 1 ), …, x ( t n ). The conditional expectation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  defined  analogously  to  (40).  The  conditional  expectation  is  a random variable; it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In all cases of interest in this paper, integrals of the type (40) or (44) need never be evaluated explicitly, only the concept of the expected value is needed.

A random variable x is gaussian (or normally distributed) if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is the well-known bell-shaped curve. Similarly, a random vector x is gaussian if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C -1 is  the  inverse  of  the  covariance  matrix  (42)  of x .  A gaussian random process is defined similarly.

The importance of gaussian random variables and processes is largely due to the following facts:

Theorem 5. ( A ) Linear functions ( and therefore conditional expectations ) on a gaussian random process are gaussian random variables.

- ( B ) Orthogonal gaussian random variables are independent.

( C ) Given any random process with means Ex ( t ) and covariances  Ex ( t ) x ( s ) ,  there  exists  a  unique  gaussian  random process with the same means and covariances.

Explanation of this transcription, John Lukesh, 20 January 2002. Using  a  photo  copy  of  R.  E.  Kalman's  1960  paper  from  an original  of  the  ASME  'Journal  of  Basic  Engineering',  March 1960  issue,  I  did  my  best  to  make  an  accurate  version  of  this rather significant piece, in an up-to-date computer file format.  For this I was able to choose page formatting and type font spacings that resulted in a document that is a close match to the original. (All  pages  start  and  stop  at  about  the  same  point,  for  example; even most individual lines of text do.) I used a recent version of Word  for  Windows  and  a  recent  Hewlett  Packard  scanner  with OCR (optical character recognition) software.  The OCR software is  very  good  on  plain  text,  even  distinguishing  between  italic versus  regular  characters  quite  reliably,  but  it  does  not  do  well with subscripts, superscripts, and special fonts, which were quite prevalent in the original paper.  And I found there was no point in trying  to  work  from  the  OCR  results  for  equations.    A  lot  of manual labor was involved. Since I wanted to make a faithful reproduction of the original, I did  not  make  any  changes  to  correct  (what  I  believed  were) mistakes  in  it.    For  example,  equation  (32)  has  a P *( t ) M ( t ) product  that  should  be  reversed,  I  think.    I  left  this,  and  some other things that I thought were mistakes in the original, as is.  (I didn't  find  very  many  other  problems  with  the  original.)    There may, of course, be problems with my transcription.  The plain text OCR  results,  which  didn't  require  much  editing, are pretty accurate I think. But the subscripts etc and the equations which I copied  essentially  manually,  are  suspect.    I've  reviewed  the resulting document quite carefully, several times finding mistakes in  what  I  did  each  time.  The  last  time  there  were  five,  four cosmetic  and  one  fairly  inconsequential.    There  are  probably more.  I would be very pleased to know about it if any reader of this finds some of them; jlukesh@deltanet.com.
