## ADJOINT FUNCTORS

BY

## DANIEL  M.  KAN(')

1.  Introduction. In  homology theory an  important role  is  played by  pairs of  functors consisting of

(i) a functor Horn  in  two variables, contravariant in  the first variable and  covariant in the  second (for instance the functor which assigns to every two abelian groups A  and B  the group Horn (A,  B)  of  homomorphisms/: A-&gt;B).

(ii) a  functor ® (tensor product) in two  variables, covariant in both (for instance the functor which assigns to  every two  abelian groups A  and B  their tensor product A®B).

These functors are not independent; there exists a  natural equivalence of  the  form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Such pairs of  functors will be  the subject of  this paper.

In the above formulation three functors Horn and only one tensor product are used. It  appears however that there exists a  kind of  duality between the tensor product and the last functor Horn, while both functors Horn outside the parentheses play a  secondary role.

Let 3H be  the category of  sets. For each category y let  H: y, &lt;l|-&gt;3TC be the functor which assigns to  every two objects A  and B  in  &lt;y  the set  H(A, B) of  the  maps/: A-&gt;B  in  Of.

Let 9C and Z  be categories and let 5:  9C--&gt;Z and T:  Z-&gt;9C  be covariant functors. Then S  is  called a  left  adjoint of  T  and T  a  right adjoint of  5  if  there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An  important property of  adjoint functors is  that each determines the other up to a  unique natural equivalence.

Examples of  adjoint functors are:

- (i) Let (2 be  the  category of  topological spaces; then the  functor XI: (3-&gt;Ct which assigns to  every space its cartesian product with the  unit interval I is  a left adjoint of  the functor Q:  Ct-&gt;ft  which assigns to  every space the  space of all  its  paths.
- (ii) Let S be  the category of  c.s.s. complexes; then the simplicial singular functor S: &amp;-&gt;S  is  a  right adjoint of the realization functor i?:S-&gt;ft which assigns to  every c.s.s. complex K  a  CW-complex of  which the w-cells are in one-to-one correspondence with the nondegenerate w-simplices of  K.

Received  by  the  editors  September 20,  1956.

(l)  The author is  now  at  The Hebrew University in  Jerusalem.

The notion of  adjointness may be  generalized to  functors in  two (or  more) variables; a  covariant functor S:  9C, *y-»Z  is  called a  left  adjoint of  a  functor T:  y, Z-&gt;9C,  contravariant in y and covariant in Z,  and T  is  called a  right adjoint of  S  if  there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Adjoint functors in  two (or  more) variables also determine each other up  to a  unique natural equivalence. The situation is  similar when both functors H are replaced by  other functors.

An  example of  adjoint functors in  two variables are the functors ®  and Horn mentioned above; CS&gt; is  a  left adjoint of  Horn.

The general theory of  adjoint functors constitutes Chapter I.

In Chapter II we  deal with direct and inverse limits. It is  shown that a direct limit functor (if  such exists) is  a  left  adjoint of  a  certain functor which always can be  defined, while an inverse limit functor is  a  right adjoint of  a similar functor.

In Chapter III several existence theorems are given. In [2] a  procedure was  described by  which from a  given functor new  functors, called lifted, can be derived. Let the functor S:  9C, 'y-&gt;Z be a left adjoint of the functor T: y, Z-&gt;9C,  then sufficient conditions will be given in order that a lifted functor of  S  has a  right adjoint or  that a  lifted functor of  T  has a  left adjoint. Thus sometimes starting from a  given pair of  adjoint functors, new  such pairs may be  constructed; for instance starting from the adjoint functors &lt;S&gt; and Horn  on  abelian groups, pairs of  adjoint functors involving groups with operators, chain complexes, etc. may be  obtained.

A  category Z  is  always accompanied by  the functor H: Z,  Z-&gt;9TC and its lifted functors. A  necessary and sufficient condition in  order that all these functors have a  left  adjoint is  that a  notion of direct limit can  be  defined in  Z. Several known functors involving c.s.s. complexes can be  obtained either by lifting of  a  suitable functor H  or  from a  left adjoint of  such a  lifted functor. These applications will  be  dealt with a  sequel entitled Functors involving c.s.s. complexes [5].

I  am deeply grateful to S.  Eilenberg for his helpful criticism during the preparation of  this paper.

## Chapter I.  General theory

2.  Notation and terminology. For the definition of  the notions category, functor, natural transformation, etc. see [2].

A  functor F  defined on  the categories *yi, ·  ·  ■  ,  %,  will  often be  denoted by  F(yu ■ ■ ■  , yn)-  Similarly if  Pand G are  functors defined on  the  categories Ihi ·  ·  ·  i  'Jim  then a  natural transformation a:  F-&gt;G is  sometimes denoted byoCyi,  · · · , &lt;y').

Only categories will  be  considered which satisfy the following condition Condition 2.1. For  every two  objects A  and B  in  a  category "y the  maps

/:  A-+B  in  &lt;y  form  a set, denoted by  H(A,  B).

Clearly the  category 9TI  of  sets satisfies condition 2.1.

Let a:  A'^&gt;A and b:  B-&gt;B'  be  maps in  a  category "y and let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

denote the set  mapping defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then it  is  easily  verified that

Proposition 2.2. The  function H:  %  &lt;y-&gt;3Il is  a functor, contravariant in the first variable and covariant in  the  second.

Hence every category "y is  accompanied by  a  functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A  category V  will  be  called proper if  its  objects form a  set.  Clearly in  view of  condition 2.1  the maps of  a  proper category form also a  set.

The dual of  a  category "y is  the category &lt;y* which has the same objects and maps as  *y; however

- (a) an  object A Ey is  denoted by  A*  if it  is  considered as  an  object of  *y*,
- (b) a  map/: A-&gt;BE1i is  denoted by/*: 5*-&gt;.4*  if  it  is  considered as  a map  of  &lt;y*,  and
- (c) the composition of  two maps /*:  B*-&gt;A*  and g*:  C*-&gt;B* in *y*  is defined  by /*  o g* = (g o /)  *.

Clearly &lt;y**  =  &lt;y  and  H(A,  B) =H(B*, A*)  for every  two  objects  A  and  B in &lt;y.

The dual of  a  functor FCyi, ·  ·  ·  ,  ■y,)  is  the functor F*(y*, ■ ■ ■  ,  &lt;y*) defined  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  every object YiE^i and every map yiEy,-

3.  Adjoint functors in  one  variable.

Definition (3.1).  Let 9C  and Z  be  categories, let  S:  9C-&gt;Z and T:  Z-*9C be  covariant functors and let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  a  natural equivalence. Then 5  is  called the  left  adjoint of  T  under a  and  T the  right adjoint of  S  under a (Notation a: S~\  T).

An  important property of  two  adjoint functors is  that each  of  them determines the other up  to  a  unique natural equivalence. This is  expressed by  the following uniqueness theorems.

Theorem 3.2. Let  S,  S': 9C-&gt;Z  and T, T': Z-&gt;X be covariant functors and let  a:  S-I  T  and a': S'-\ T'. Let a:  S'-&gt;S  be  a natural transformation. Then there  exists a  unique natural transformation r: 7-*T'  such  that  commutatively holds in  the diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If  a  is  a  natural equivalence, then  so is  r.

Theorem 3.2*.  Let S,  S':  9C-&gt;Z and  T,  T':  Z-»9C be covariant functors  and let  a:  S~\T and a': S'-\T'. Let r: T-*T'  be  a  natural transformation. Then there  exists a  unique natural transformation &lt;r:  S'-+S such that commutativity holds  in  the  diagram (3.2a). If r  is  a  natural equivalence, then  so  is  a.

Proof of  Theorem 3.2.  Suppose r: T-+T' is a  natural transformation such that commutativity holds in 3.2a. Then for  every object X£9C and  ZEZ and  for every  map fEH(X, TZ)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  particular if X=TZ and f=irz, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently if a natural transformation t: T-&gt;T'  exists such that commutativity holds in  3.2a, then it  must satisfy (3.3). Hence it  is  unique.

It  follows from the naturality of  a' that for  every map  g:  Z-&gt;Z'EZ commutativity holds in  the diagrams

<!-- image -->

and in  view of  the naturality of  a  and  a  commutativity also holds in  the diagram

Consequently by

(3.4a)

Then  the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e. the function r  defined by (3.3) is  a  natural transformation.

Now  let  cr be  a  natural equivalence and let r' be  the natural transformation induced by  cr-1. Then tt' and t't are natural transformations induced by ao~~l and &lt;r-1cr,  and the uniqueness of  tt' and t't together with the fact that aa~1  and &lt;r\_1&lt;7 are identities yields that tt' and t't are also identities, i.e. r is  a  natural equivalence with inverse r'. This completes the proof of  Theorem 3.2.

The proof of  Theorem 3.2*  is  similar. Theorem 3.2*  could also  have been obtained from Theorem 3.2  using the duality Theorem 3.4  below, which essentially asserts that a  functor S  is  a  left adjoint of  a  functor T  if  and only if  the functor S*,  the dual of  S,  is  a  right adjoint of  the functor T*,  the dual of T.

Let  S:  9C-&gt;Z and T:  Z-&gt;9C be  covariant functors and let  S*:  9C*^Z* and F*:  Z*-&gt;9C*  be their  duals.  Then  by definition  II(SX,  Z) =H(Z*,  S*X*) and H(X,  TZ) =H(T*Z*, X*)  ior  every  object  XG9C and  ZEZ.

Theorem 3.4.  Let  a:  5(9C)H T(Z)  and  define for  every object X*£9C* and Z*EZ* a  map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  a  natural equivalence, i.e. a1: T*~\S*. Also a#f=a.

Proof. Let x*\  X*-*X'*e9C* and z*: Z'*^&gt;Z*EZ* be  maps. Then it follows from the naturality of  a that for  every map  f*EH(T*Z*, X*)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.  a*  is  a  natural transformation. The fact that a  and hence or1  is  a  natural equivalence now  implies that oft is  so.  That a** =a follows immediately from

3.4a.

4.  Adjoint functors in  several variables. A  covariant functor S:  X,  "y^Z may  be  regarded as  a  collection consisting of
2. (i) a  covariant functor S( ,Y): 9C-&gt;Z  for  every object FG*y and
3. (ii)  a  natural transformation S( ,y): S( ,Y)-*S(  ,Y') for  every map  y.Y-* Y'E%

Now  suppose that for  every object YEy a  covariant functor Ty:  Z-*X and a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are given, i.e. ay: S(  ,Y)~\Ty. Then it follows from Theorem 3.2 that for every map y:  Y-&gt;Y'Ey there exists a  unique natural transformation Ty:  Ty-&gt;Ty  such that commutativity holds in  the  diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let y': Y'-&gt;Y"EyThen the uniqueness of the natural transformations Tu, Ty' and  TV'y  implies  that TyTy-  = TV'V. Similarly if i:  Y-*Yis the  identity, then Til Ty-^Ty is the identity natural transformation. Consequently the function T defined  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  every object FG'y and ZEZ and every map y:  F-&gt;F'Gcy and z:  Z-*Z' EZ, is  a  functor T:  %  Z-&gt;9C,  contravariant in  'y  and covariant in  Z.

Clearly the  function a  defined  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  every object XEX, YEy and ZEZ, is  a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus  we have

Theorem 4.1.  Let  S:    9C,  *y-&gt;Z be a  covariant  functor and  let for  every  object YEy be given  a  covariant functor TY:  Z-&gt;9C and  a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.  ay: S(  ,Y)-\ Ty.  Then  there  exists  a  unique  functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

contravariant in y  and covariant in Z  and a  unique natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that for  every object X£9C, YEy and  Z£Z

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.  a:  S~\ T.

Remark 4.2. It is  clear that in  the above starting from a  functor S:  9C, cy-&gt;Z,  contravariant in  %  a  functor T:  y, Z-&gt;9C,  covariant in  %  would have been obtained. As  however a  functor contravariant in  'y  becomes covariant when  regarded as  a  functor in  "y*, the  dual of  %  we  may  restrict ourselves to functors S:  X,  y-»Z  which are covariant in  both variables.

In  view of  Theoem 4.1  and Remark 4.2  we  now define adjoint functions in  two variables as  follows.

Definition 4.3.  Let 5:  9C,  "y-&gt;Z  be  a  covariant functor, let  T:  y,  Z-»9C be  a  functor contravariant in  "y and  covariant in  Z and let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  a  natural equivalence. Then 5  is  called the  left  adjoint of  T  under a  and T the right  adjoint  of S under  a  (Notation a:  SH  T).

As in  the  case  of functors in  one  variable, adjoint functors in  two  variables determine each other up to  a  unique natural equivalence. This is  expressed by the following uniqueness theorems which by the above argument follow directly from  the  Theorems 3.2  and  3.2*.

Theorem 4.4.  Let  S,  S': 9C,  &lt;y-*Z be covariant  functors, let  T,  T':  y,  Z-&gt;9C be  functors contravariant in  y  and  covariant in  Z and  let a: S~\  T and  a': S'-\ T'. Let  a:  S'-&gt;S  be  a  natural transformation. Then there exists a  unique natural transformation r: T-*T' such  that  commutativity holds  in  the  diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If a  is  a  natural equivalence, then  so  is  t.

Theorem 4.4*.  Let S, S'\  X, &lt;y-»Z be covariant functors,  let T,  T':  Of,  Z-&gt;9C be  functors contravariant in  y  and  covariant in  Z and  let a: S-I  P  and  a': S'-\ T'. Let  t. T-&gt;T'  be  a  natural transformation. Then  there  exists a  unique natural transformation &lt;r:  S'-&gt;S  such that commutativity holds  in the  diagram (4.4a). If t is  a  natural equivalence, then  so is  o~.

The duality Theorem 3.4  may be  generalized as  follows. Let S:  X,  "y-&gt;Z be a  covariant functor and denote by S*:  "y,  X*-&gt;Z* the functor contravariant in  "y and covariant in  X*  defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every object FE'y and X*£9C* and every map yEy and x*EX*. Similarly let T:  y, Z-&gt;9C  be  a  functor contravariant in  "y and covariant in Z  and denote by T*:  Z*,  y-+X* the covariant functor such that T»  =  T. Then  clearly  for every  object  XEX, YEy and  ZEZ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 4.5. Let a:  S(X,  y)~\T(y, Z) and  define  for  every object  X* EX*, YEy and  Z*EZ* a  map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then  the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  a  natural equivalence, i.e. a': P#(Z*, y)~iSf(y, X*). Also  a**=a.

The proof of  Theorem 4.5  is  obvious.

It  follows from the  duality Theorem 4.5  that for  every Theorem A  involving a  natural equivalence a:  S(X, y)~\ T(y, Z)  a  dual Theorem A*  may be obtained by applying Theorem A  to the natural equivalence oft:  P'(Z*, "y) HS*Cy, 9C*) and then writing the result in  terms of  the categories X,  y  and Z, the functors S  and T  and the natural equivalence a, i.e. "reversing all arrows" in  the categories X*  and Z*.  It is  easily seen that in  this sense the Theorems 4.4  and 4.4*  are the dual of  each other.

We  now  consider functors in  more  than two  variables. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  a  functor covariant in  X,  &amp;i,  ·  ·  · ,  am  and contravariant in  (Bi, ·  ·  · ,  (B' and  let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  a  functor contravariant in ax, ·  ·  ·  ,  Qm and covariant in (Bi,  ·  ·  ·  ,  (B', Z. Then ([2,  Theorem 13.2]) 5  and T  may  be  considered as  functors in  two  variables as  follows. Let 'y  be  the cartesian product category (see [2])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then 5  may  be  considered as  a  covariant functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

contravariant in 'y  and covariant in Z.  The case of functors in  more than two variables thus may be  brought back to that of  functors in  two variables only.

5. The  relative case. We  shall  now  consider the  case  in  which the  functors H  are  replaced by  other functors.

Definition 5.1.  Let  F:  £-&gt;3R  be  a  covariant functor and  let  Q:  X,  9C-&gt;·£ be  a  functor contravariant in  the first variable and covariant in  the second. The functor Q is  called a  hom-functor rel. F  if  there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and T  as  a  functor

## Examples 5.2.

- (a) The functor H: X,  9C-&gt;9TC is  a  hom-functor relative to the identity functor E:  3TC-&gt;9TL
- (b) Let 9  be the category of  abelian groups and homomorphisms. Let Horn: g,  9-&gt;9 be  the functor which assigns to every two abelian groups B and C  the group Horn (B, C)  oi the homomorphisms of  B  into C  (see [3]). Let F:  g-&gt;9TC be  the functor which assigns to  every group its  underlying set. Then Horn: 9,  9-&gt;9 &gt;s a  hom-functor rel. F.
- (c) Let a  be  the  category of  topological spaces and  continuous maps  and let  Map: a, ft-&gt;Ct  be  the functor which assigns to  every two  spaces X  and F the function space Map (X, F)  =  Yx  with the compact-open topology (see [2]). Let  F:  (&amp;-&gt;9Tl be  the functor which assigns to  every space its  underlying set. Then Map: &amp;,  ft-»ft  is  a  hom-functor rel. F.

Definition 5.3.  Let  S:  9C-&gt;Z, T:  Z-&gt;9C and  F:  £-&gt;31Z be  covariant functors  and  let  Q:  X,  9C-&gt;£ and  R:  Z,  Z-&gt;£ be  horn-functors rel.  F.  Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  a  natural equivalence. Then S  is  called the  left  adjoint of  T  rel. F  under 8 and  T the right  adjoint  of S  rel.  F  under  8  (Notation 8:  S-\  T rel.  F).

It  will  now  be  shown that adjointness rel. F  implies adjointness.

Theorem 5.4.  Let  8:  S-\T rel.  F.  Then  there  exists  a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.  a:  S-\T.

Proof. As  Q and  R  are  hom-functors rel.  F  there exist natural equivalences

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define  for  every  object  X£9C  and  ZEZ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then clearly a is  a  natural equivalence because y(X, T(Z)), F8(X, Z)  and S(S(X), Z)  are  so.

We  now  state the corresponding results for  functors in  two variables.

Definition 5.5.  Let S:  X,  'y-&gt;Z and F:  £-»3TC be  covariant functors, let T:  y, Z-&gt;9C  be a functor contravariant in 'y  and covariant in Z  and let Q: X,  9C-&gt;£ and  R:  Z,  Z-&gt;£  be  hom-functors rel.  F.  Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  a  natural equivalence. Then S  is  called the left  adjoint of  9TC rel.  F  under  8 and  T the right  adjoint  of S rel.  F  under  8  (Notation 8:  S~\  T rel.  F).

Theorem 5.6. If 8:  S(X, y)-\T(y, Z)  rel. F  then there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.a:S(X, y)~\T(y, Z).

Example 5.7. Let the functors Horn: g,  g-&gt;g and F: g-&gt;9Tl  be as in Example (5.2b) and let &lt;8&gt;: g,  g-»g be  the covariant functor which assigns to  every two abelian groups A  and B  their tensor product A ®B (see [3]). As  is  well  known (see [2]) there exists for  every three abelian groups A,  B and C  an isomorphism 8'-  Horn (A  ®B, C) «Hom (A, Horn (B, C)) which is natural, i.e.  there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence the  tensor product ®  is  a  left  adjoint of  the functor Horn (rel. F).

Example 5.8.  Let the functors Map: ft,  a-&gt;a  and F:  a-&gt;3K  be  as  in Example 5.2c  and let X  denote the  cartesian product. Let Q,tc  be  the full  subcategory of  CI  generated by  the locally compact spaces. As  is  well  known for

every three spaces X,  Z£a and YE&amp;u a  homeomorphism ft:  ZXXY«(ZY)X can  be  defined as  follows. Let  fEZXXY, i.e./: XX Y-&gt;Z  is  a  continuous map. The  map  ftf: X-&gt;ZY  then maps  a  point  x£X into the  point (ftf)xEZY, i.e. the  map  (ftf)x:  Y-^Z,  given  by  ((ftf)x)y=ft(x, y)  for  every  point  y£ Y. This homeomorphism is  natural, i.e. there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence 2/*e  cartesian product X  is  a  left  adjoint of the functor Map (rel.  F).

Example 5.9.  Let I  denote the unit interval. Then it  follows  from  Example  5.8  that the  functor XI: a-&gt;a is a  left  adjoint of  the  functor Map  (I, ): a-&gt;a,  i.e.  "taking the  cartesian product with  the  unit interval" is  a  left  adjoint of "taking  the space  of all  paths" (rel.  F).

As  is  "well  known" the homotopy relation for continuous maps may be defined using either the functor XI or  the functor Map (I, )  as  follows. Let P  be  a  space consisting of  one  point p  and let  p0: P-&gt;J  (resp. pi\  P-*I)  be  the map  given by  p0p = 0  (resp. pip= 1).  For  every space  X  let  maps  &lt;px: X-&gt;XX.P and ypx: Map (P, X)-&gt;X  be  defined by &lt;pxx  =  (x, p) and &amp;xf=fp for every point  xEX and  map/: P-&gt;X. Then two  maps/0,/i: X-»F£.4 are  homotopic

- (i) if  there exists  a  map  g: XXI-*YE a  such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or  equivalently

- (ii)    if  there exists a  map h:  X-*Map (I, Y)E a  such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equivalence of  these two definitions is  an immediate consequence of the adjointness of  the functors XI and Map (I, ).

Example 5.10. Let a0  be  the category of  topological spaces with a  base point, i.e.  an  object of a0  is  a  pair (X,  x)  where X£a and  xEX is  a  point, while a  map/: (X, x)-*(Y,  y)  of a0  is  a  map/: X-&gt;YE&amp; such that/x = y. Let S: do-»ao  be  the covariant functor which assigns to  every object (X, x) E  ao  its suspension (X', x') defined as follows. Let Sl be a 1-sphere and let sES1 be  a  point. Then X' is  obtained from XXS1 by shrinking to  a  point of the subspace (xXS^VJ(XXs) and x' is  the image of  (x,  s)  under the identification map  XX-S1-&gt;X'.  Let  Map0: ao,  a0-&gt;a0 be  the  functor which  assigns to  every two  objects (X, x)  and (F, y)  of a0  the pair Map0  ((X, x), (Y,  y)) =  (Z, z), where Z  is  the function space (F, y)'Xl) (with the compact-open topology) and where the map z:  (X, x)-*(Y,  y) is  given by zg=y ior every point gEX. Let the functor F:  a0-&gt;3TC assign to every object (X,  x)E&amp;o the underlying set of  the space X, then clearly Map0: a0, a0-&gt;a0 is  a  homfunctor rel. F.  Let fl=Mapo ((S1,  s), ),  the loop  functor. Then analogous to Example 5.8 for every two objects (X, x), (Y, y)£a0 a  homeomorphism fto: Map0  (S(X, x), (Y,  y))  «Map0 ((X, x), fl(F, y)) can be  given which is

natural, i.e.  there exist a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence the suspension functor S  is  a  left  adjoint of  the  loop functor fi  (rel. F). Example 5.11.  This  example is due  to  P. J.  Hilton. Let ao  be  the  category of  topological spaces with a  base point (see  Example 5.10).  Let  X2:  a0-&gt;a0 be  the covariant functor such that for  every object (F, y0) E  &amp;o,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and let V2:  a0-&gt;a0  be the covariant functor such that for  every object (X,  x0)ea0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  XVX  = XXx0UxoXXCXXX. Let the functor Map0:  a0,  a0-&gt;a0  be as  in  Example 5.11.  Then for  every two  objects (X,  x0),  (Y,  yo)E ao  a  homeomorphism 8:  Map0  (V2(X, x0),  (Y,  y0))-&gt;Mapo ((X, x0),  X2(F, y0))  may be defined  by  (8f)x = (f(xXx0)  Xf(x0Xx)) lor  every  map  /:  V2(X,  x0)-&gt;(F, y0) and point xEX. Clearly is  natural, i.e.  there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence the functor V2  is  a  left  adjoint of the functor X2  (rel.  F).

6.  Two  natural transformations. Let  S:  X-&gt;Z and T:  Z-&gt;9C  be  covariant functors and let  a: S~\  T.  Then we  may define a  natural transformation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where E:  X-&gt;X denotes the identity functor, by assigning to every object XEX the  map  kX: X-^TSX given  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It must of  course be  verified that the function k  so  defined is  natural. It follows from the naturality of  a that for  every map x:  X-&gt;X'EX commutativity holds  in  the  diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently

i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e. k is  natural.

The natural transformation k will  be  referred to  as  the  natural transformation  induced by a.

The following lemma expresses the natural equivalence a  in  terms of  the natural transformation k.  It  follows that k completely determines a.

Lemma  6.2.  Let  a:  5(9C)H T(Z) and let  k: E(X)-*TS(X) be  the  natural transformation induced by a. Then  for  every object  X E  X and  ZEZ and  for  every map  f:  SX-&gt;ZE% commutativity holds  in  the  diagram

<!-- image -->

TZ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

fE H(SX, Z).

Proof. It  follows from the naturality of  ex. that commutativity holds in  the diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This completes the proof.

Now let S:  X-&gt;Z and T:  Z^X be covariant functors and let k':  E(X) -&gt;TS(X)  be  a  natural transformation. Then k'  induces a  natural transformation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as follows.  For  every  object  X£ X and  Z£Z the  map ft: H(SX, Z)-&gt;II(X, TZ) is defined  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently

It is readily verified that the function 8 so defined is natural. If 8 is  an equivalence for all objects XEX and Z£z, then clearly 8:  S~\T and (in view  of  Lemma 6.2)  k'  is  the natural transformation induced by  8.  Hence we have:

Theorem 6.4. Let S:  9C-&gt;Z  and T:  Z-&gt;9C  be  covariant functors and let k':  E(X)-&gt;TS(X) be  a natural transformation. Then there exists a natural equivalence fi:  S~\T which  induces k'  (and hence  is  unique) if and only if  for every object XEX and  ZEZ the function  8: H(SX, Z)^&gt;H(X, TZ)  defined by (6.3) is  an  equivalence.

We  shall now  dualize the  above results.

Leta:S(9C)HP(Z) and  let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be the natural transformation induced by the natural equivalence oft: T*(Z*)-\S*(X*). Denote  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the natural transformation obtained from  ift by  "reversing all  arrows" in  the categories X*  and Z*,  i.e.  for every object ZEZ the map pZ:  STZ-&gt;Z  is given  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  natural transformation p. will  be  referred to  as  the  natural transformation  induced by  cr1.

Lemma  6.2*.  Let  a:  S(9C)-i P(Z) and  let  p.: ST(Z)-&gt;E(Z) be  the  natural transformation induced by  or1. Then  for every  object  XEX and  ZEZ and  for every  map  g:  X-&gt;PZ£Z commutativity holds  in  the  diagram

<!-- image -->

SX

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

gEH(X, TZ).

Let S:  X-&gt;Z and T:  Z-&gt;9C  be  covariant functors. Then a  natural transformation p.':  SP(Z)-&gt;E(Z) induces a  natural transformation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by

(6.3*)

and we  have:

Theorem 6.4*. Let  S:  X-&gt;Z and T:  Z-*X  be  covariant functors and let p.':  ST(Z)-^E(Z) be  a natural transformation. Then there exists a natural equivalence y~x:  S~\  T  such that y  induces p.'  (and hence  y is unique) if  and only if for  every object  XEX and  ZE'L  the function  y:  H(X, TZ)-&gt;H(SX, Z) defined by  6.3*  is  an  equivalence.

Example 6.5. Let ao, the category of topological spaces with a  base point, the suspension functor S:  a0-&gt;a0, the loop functor ft:  a0-&gt;a0, the hom-functor Map0:  a0, a0-&gt;a0 and  the  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  as  in  Example 5.10. Using the natural transformation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

induced by  fto we  now define the suspension homomorphism of  the  homotopy groups (see [4]) and dually using the natural transformation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

induced by  fto1  the suspension homomorphism of  the cohomology groups (see [6])  will  be  obtained.

Let (Y,  y)E&amp;o and let 5" be an w-sphere and s"ES" a point. Clearly S(Sn, sn)  ~  (Sn+1,  5n+1).  As the elements of  the nth homotopy group ir'(F, y) of (Y, y) are the homotopy classes of  maps (Sn,  sn)-&gt;(Y,  y), i.e. the components of  Map0 ((Sn, sn), (Y, y)), it can easily be verified that the homeomorphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

induces an  isomorphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The composite homomorphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

now is  the suspension homomorphism 7r'(F, y) -*irn+\S( Y, y).

Let tt  be  an abelian group. Then an  object (K, k) E  a0  is  called of  type (tt,  n)  if  Tn(K,  k)~ir and  7r,(X,  k) =0 ior  i^n. Clearly if  (K, k)  is  of  type (tt, n),  then  Q(X, k) is of type  (r,  n -  l).  Now  let  (K,  k) be  of type  (t,  n)  and let (X, x)£a0. If  X  is  "reasonably smooth" then the elements of  the wth cohomology group Hn(X, x;  it)  of  (X, x)  with coefficients in  ir  are in  one-toone correspondence with the homotopy classes of  maps (X, x)-*(K,  k),  i.e.

gEH(X,TZ)

with the components of  Map0 ((X, x), (K, k)). It  may then be  verified that the  homeomorphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

induces an  isomorphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and that the  composite homomorphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  the suspension homomorphism H"(X, x;  ir)-*H"~1(U(X, x); t).

## Chapter II.  Direct and  inverse limits

7. Direct limits. Let Z  be  a  category and let V  be  a  proper category (i.e. the objects of  V  form a  set). Let K: V-*Z be  a  covariant functor. Then  K may  be  considered as  a  F  diagram over Z,  i.e.  a  system of  objects and  maps of Z  indexed by  the objects and maps of  TJ. We  shall now  define what we  mean by  a  direct limit of  such a  system.

Let Zv denote the  category  of  V diagrams over Z,  i.e.  the  category of  which the objects are the covariant functors V-&gt;Z and  of  which the  maps are the natural transformations between them (see [2,  §8]).  The category Zv satisfies condition 2.1  because "U  is  proper. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be the embedding functor which assigns to every object ZEZ the constant functor EvZ: V-&gt;Z which maps every object of  V  into Z  and every map into iz,  and which assigns to  every map z:  Z-&gt;Z'£Z the natural transformation Evz:  EVZ^EVZ' given  by  (Eyz)V  = z for  every object F£U. We  then  define

Definition 7.1. Let AE"Z be an object and let  k:  K^&gt;EVAEZV be a map. Then A  is  called the  direct limit of  K  under the  map k  if  for  every object BEZ and every map k':  K^EyBEZv there exists a  unique map/: A-&gt;BEZ such that commutativity holds in  the  diagram

<!-- image -->

## i.e.  Evfok = k'  (Notation ^=lim*X)(2).

Example 7.2.  Let V be  the  category of  which the  objects are  the  elements

(2) A  similar definition of  direct limit has, for  the case of  groups, been given in  mimeographed notes of  lectures of  R.  H.  Fox (Princeton, 1955).

of  some set V and which has no  maps other than identity maps. Let a  be the category of  topological spaces. A  functor K: "0-&gt;a  (which is  both covariant and contravariant) is  then merely a  collection }X'} of  topological spaces indexed by  the set F.  Let X  =  \Ja&lt;EV Xa  be  their union (the points of  X are the pairs (a, x)  where aE V  and xEX). For each aE V  let  ka-  Xa-»X denote the embedding map given by kax  =  (a, x) for  xEXa. Then X is  the direct limit  of  K  under the  map  k:  K-*EVX defined  by  ka = ka ior  all  aEV.

Example 7.3.  Let 9  be  the category of  abelian groups and let V  be  as  in Example 7.2.  A  functor K: T)-&gt;9  then is  a  collection {Ga}  of  abelian groups indexed by  the set F.  Let  G= ^aer Ga be  their direct  sum  (see [3]). For  each aE V let  ka:  Ga-&gt;G be  the injection. Then G is  the direct limit of  K  under the map  k: K^EyG defined  by  ka = ka ior  all  aE V.

Example 7.4.  Let D  be  a  directed set,  i.e.  a  quasi-ordered set  such that for each pair of  elements di,  d2ED there exists a  d3ED such that di&lt;d3 and d2&lt;d3. A  directed set  D  may be  regarded as  a  category SD  (see [2])  of  which the objects are the elements of  D  and which has  one  map (d2, di):  di-&gt;J2  for each pair (d2, di)  such that di&lt;d2. Enlarge D  to  a  category £&gt;x by  adding one object «&gt; and for every element dED, one map (°°, d):d-*x&gt;. Then the following definition of  direct limit is  implicitly contained in [2].

Let K: 2D-»Z  be  a  covariant functor and let the functor Kx: T&gt;x-»Z  be an extension of  K. Then the object Km*&gt; EZ is  called the direct limit of  K under Kx  if  for  every extension K'': 3D-&gt;Z  of  K there exists a  unique natural transformation a:  Kx-^K'a such that each ad with d^ » is  the identity. It is easily verified that this definition is equivalent with Definition 7.1 for U =  2D.

In general not every object of Zv  will have a direct limit (under some map). In  order that every object of  Zv  has a  direct limit under some map it is  necessary and sufficient that the functor Ey: Z-&gt;Zf  has a  left adjoint. A more precise formulation of both halves of this statement is  given in the following two theorems.

Theorem 7.5.  Let  L:  Zp-»Z be  a  covariant functor, let  a:  L(ZV)-\EV(Z) and let  k:  E(Zv)-^EyL(Zv) be  the natural transformation induced by  a. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  every object KEZv-

Theorem 7.6.  Let  for every  object  KEZV be given  an  object  LKEZ and  a map  kK:  K-^&gt;EvLKEZv such  that  LK  = \imKK  K.  Then

- (i) the function L  (defined only  for objects  of  Zv)  may be extended uniquely to  a functor L:  Zy-&gt;Z such  that  the function k becomes  a  natural transformation k:E(Zv)-*EvL(Zv),
- (ii) there exists a natural equivalence a:  L(Zv)~iEv(Z) such that k  is the natural transformation induced by  a. In view  of  Lemma 6.2  a  is  unique.

Definition 7.7.  A  category Z  is  called V-direct if  every object of  Zv  has a  direct limit under some map.

Theorem 7.8.  A  category Z  is  V-direct if  and only  if  the functor Er: Z-&gt;Zy has a  left adjoint.

Remark 7.9.  The first half  of  Theorem 7.8  follows directly from  Theorem 7.5. In order to  obtain the second half of  Theorem 7.8  from Theorem 7.6  a kind of  axiom of  choice would be  needed; given for  every object of  Zv  the existence of  a  direct limit under some map, a  choice must be  made simultaneously for  all  objects of  Zv  (which need not even form a  set) of  such an object and map. In practice however the statement "every object of  Zv  has a  direct limit under some  map" means that it  is  possible to  give  a construction which assigns simultaneously to all objects KEZv an object LKEZ and a map  kK:  K-*EvLK such  that  LK  = \imKK  K.  It  is in this  sense  that the  notion D-direct will  be  used. The second half  of  Theorem 7.8  then is  an  immediate consequence of  Theorem 7.6.

If  a  category Z  is  "U-direct, then we  denote by lim^: Zk-&gt;Z an  arbitrary but fixed left adjoint of  the functor Ev: Z-&gt;Zk, by  ctv an  arbitrary but fixed natural equivalence ay:  limK HEk and by  Xk the natural transformation induced  by  cty.

Proof of  Theorem 7.5.  Let  BEZ and  KEZv be  objects. The natural equivalence a yields an equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  view of  Lemma 6.2 this one-to-one correspondence is  given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e. for every map k':  K-&gt;EVB  there is  a  unique map  /:  LK-*B  such that k' = EvfoKK.

Proof of  Theorem 7.6.  Let  k:  K-&gt;K'EZV  he  a  map.  Then according to Definition 7.1 there exists a  unique map Uk:  LK-^LK'EZ such that commutativity holds in  the diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence if  there exists a  functor L:  Zv-&gt;Z with the required property, then it must be  defined by  Lk= Uk  for every map kEZvIt is  now easily verified that the function L  so  defined is  a  covariant functor L:  Zv-»Z.

For every object P£Z and  KEZv define a  function

by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

fE H(LK, B).

As LK  =  lim»x  K merely means that a is an equivalence, it follows from Theorem 6.4  that a is  a  natural equivalence a:  L(Zv)~\Ev(Z) such that k is the natural transformation induced by a.

8. Inverse limits. The definition of inverse limits and their properties may be  obtained from those of  direct limits by  duality.

Let X  be  a  category, let V  be  a  proper category and let  K:  U^9C be  a contravariant functor. Denote by  A'*:  1)-&gt;9C* the induced covariant functor. Then K*EXV*.  An  object  A EX then  will  be  called  an  inverse limit of  K  if the  object  A*EX* is  a  direct limit  of  K*.

We  shall now  give the exact definition dual to (7.1).

Let Xv =  (Xv*)*, i.e. Xv  is  the category of the contravariant functors V-&gt;X and  the  natural transformations between them. Let  Ev:  X*-*Xv* be  as in  §7  and let  EV = EV*, i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  the embedding functor which assigns to  every object XE;9C  the constant functor U-&gt;9C which  maps  all  of  V  into  X  and  ix.

Definition 8.1.  Let  AEX be  an  object and  let  k: EVA^KEXV he  a map. Then A  is  called the inverse limit of K  under the  map k  if  for  every object P£ Stand every map k':  EVB-^KEXV there exists a  unique map/: B-&gt;AEX such that commutativity holds in  the  diagram

<!-- image -->

i.e.  k o Evf=k' (Notation A =lim*  K).

Example 8.2. Let the categories a and V  and the functor A':  U-&gt;a  be as  in  Example 7.2. Let F= \\aev X' be the cartesian product of the spaces X'. For every a£ V  let ka: Y-&gt;Xa be  the projection onto Xa. Then F  is  the inverse  limit  of K  under the  map  k:  Ev Y-+K  defined  by  ka = ka for  all  aE V.

Example 8.3. Let the categories g  and V  and the functor K:  U-&gt;g be as in Example 7.3. Let 77= Y[«&lt;rv Ca  be the direct product (see [3]) of the groups G'. For each aEV let ka:II-&gt;Ga be the projection. Then II is the inverse limit  of  K  under the  map  k:  EVH-&gt;K  defined  by  ka = ka for  all aE V.

Examtlk 8.4. Let the categories :D and £&gt;' be  as  in  Example 7.4.  Then the following definition of  inverse limit is  implicitly contained in [2]:

Let  K:  3D-&gt;9C be  a  contravariant functor and let the functor X': 3D«,-*9C be  an  extension of  K.  Then the object Kx  °o EX is  called the inverse limit of K under K' if  for every extension K'': S)K-&gt;X  of  K there exists a  unique natural transformation a:  X'«,-►X*, such that ad  with rf^» is  the identity. It is  easily verified that this definition is  equivalent with Definition 8.1 for 13  =  3D.

We  now  dualize Definition 7.7  and Theorem 7.8.

Definition 8.5.  A  category X is called V-inverse if  every object of  Xv  has an  inverse limit under some  map.

Theorem 8.6. A  category X  is V-inverse if and only if the  functor Ev: £C-&gt;9CK has  a  right  adjoint.

If  the category X  is  U-inverse, then we  denote by limy: Xv-&gt;9C  an  arbitrary but fixed right adjoint of  the functor Ev:  9C-&gt;9C7, by  av an arbitrary but fixed natural equivalence av:Ev-\\imv and by XF  the natural transformation induced by (av)~l.

## 9.  Direct and  inverse categories.

Definition 9.1.  A  category Z  is  said to  have  direct limits if  it  is  U-direct for  every proper category V,  i.e. if  for  every proper category V  each object of  Zv  has a  direct limit (under some map).

Examples 9.2.  Examples of  categories which have direct limits are

- (a) the category 911  of  sets,
- (b) the category g  of  abelian groups and
- (c) the  category a  of  topological spaces.

A  necessary and sufficient condition in  order that a  category have direct limits is  the existence of  a  left adjoint of  a  certain functor. The exact formulation of  both halves of  this statement will  be  given in  the  Theorems 9.4  and 9.5  below which are  analogous to  the  Theorems 7.5  and 7.6.

Let Z be  a  category. Define a  category Zd, the  category  of all  diagrams over Z, (a  generalization of the category 3Mr  of [2]) as follows. An object of Zd  is a  pair (V,  K)  where V  is  a  proper category and K: V-&gt;Z is  a  covariant functor. Given two objects (V,  K) and ("0',  K') of  Zd, a  map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

oi Zd is  a  pair (F, k)  where F  is  a  covariant functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from  K  to  the  composite functor K'F: 1)-&gt;Z,  i.e.  for  every map  v.  Fi-&gt;F2G°U commutativity holds in  the  diagram and k  is  a  natural transformation

Now  let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  another map  in  Z,i- Then for  every map  v:  Vi-&gt;V2EV  commutativity also holds  in  the  diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and composition in Za  is  defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows immediately from the above diagram that the collection Z*  so defined is  a  category. That Zd  satisfies condition 2.1 follows from the fact that only proper categories 1)  are used.

The  effect  of  fixing  the  proper caregory V in  the  object (V,  K)  is  to  restrict Z&lt;j  to the subcategory Zk.

Let 0  be  an arbitrary but fixed category which contains only one object and its  identity map. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  the inclusion functor. Then we  define an  embedding functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as the composite functor Ed = Ed,oEo.  Thus EdA  =  (0,  E0A) lor every object AEZ.

For every proper category V  denote by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the only  such functor (which is  both covariant and contravariant).

The following lemma relates the definition of  direct limits with the  embedding functor Ed:  Z-&gt;Z,*.

Lemma  9.3.  Let  A EZ be an  object and  let k:  K-&gt;EvAEZv be a  map.  Then A = limA  K  if  and  only  if for  every object P£Z and  every map  (Oy, k'):  (V,  K)

[March

-&gt;EdB  E  Zd there  exists a  unique map  f:  A -+B  E  Z such  that  commutativity holds in  the  diagram

<!-- image -->

Proof.  It  is easily  verified  that  Erf= (O0, E0f)  and  (E0f)Ov = EYf. In  view of  the definition of  composition in  Zd commutativity in (9.3a) is  equivalent with  the  condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first half of  this condition is  an identity while the second part expresses exactly the condition of  Definition 7.1.  This proves the  lemma.

Theorem 9.4. Let  L:  Z,;-&gt;Z be  a  covariant functor, let  a:  L(Zd)~\Ed(Z) and  let k: E(Zd)-&gt;EdL(Zd) be the  natural transformation induced by a. Then  for every  object  (V,  K)EZd,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  k is  given  by  (Ov,  k) =k(V, K).

Theorem 9.5.  Let for  every object (V,  K)EZd be given an  object L(V,  K)EZ and a  map k(V,  K):  (V,  K)-+EdL(V, K)EZd such  that  L(V, K)=\imkK where k is  defined by (Ov, k) =k(V, K),  then

- (i) the function L  (defined  only  for objects  of  Zd) may  be extended uniquely to  a  functor L: Z,*-&gt;Z  such that the  function k  becomes a  natural transformation K:E(Zd)-&gt;EdL(Zd),
- (ii) there exists a natural equivalence a:  L(Zd)-\Ed(Z) such that n  is the natural transformation induced by a.  In  view  of  Lemma 6.2  a  is  unique.

The proofs of these theorems are similar to those of  Theorems 7.5  and 7.6;  Lemma 9.3  is  used  instead of  Definition 7.1.

The following theorem is  analogous to  Theorem 7.8.  A  remark similar to Remark 7.9 applies.

Theorem 9.6. A  category Z  has direct limits if  and only if the  functor Ed:  Z-&gt;Z^  has  a  left adjoint.

If  a  category Z  has direct limits, then we  shall denote by  limd:  Zd-&gt;Z  an arbitrary but fixed  left adjoint of  the functor Ed:  Z-&gt;Zd,  by  ad  an  arbitrary

but fixed  natural equivalence ad:  lim&lt;;-IE,j  and by  A&lt;j the natural transformation induced by  ad.

We  shall now  state the corresponding (dual) result of  Theorem 9.6 for inverse limits.

Definition 9.1 *. A category X is said  to have inverse  limits if it  is  "O-inverse for  every proper category *U.

Examples

9.2*.

Examples of  categories

- (a) the category 911  of  sets,
- (b) the category g  of  abelian groups and
- (c) the category a of  topological spaces.

Let X{=(Xd*)*. Consider the functor Ed:  9C*-&gt;9Cd* and let Ei  = Ed*,  i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which have

inverse limits

are is  the dual embedding functor.

Theorem 9.6*. A  category X  has inverse limits if  and only  if  the  functor E{:  9C-&gt;9C* has  a  right  adjoint.

## Chapter III. Existence theorems

10.  Subdivision of a category. With a  proper category "0 we  may  associate a  linear graph V with oriented 1-simplices, of  which the vertices are  in  one-toone correspondence with the objects of  V  and of  which the 1-simplices are in  one-to-one correspondence with the  maps of  V  which are  not an  identity; each 1-simplex is  oriented from "the vertex of  the  domain" to "the vertex of the range" of  the corresponding map of  *U.  The subdivision of V is  a  linear graph FA defines as  follows. The  vertices of  FA are  the  vertices of  F  and the centers of  the 1-simplices of V.  The 1-simplices of FA  are the halves of  the 1simplices of V,  each  hall being oriented from the  center of  the original 1-simplex. The subdivision of  the category *U  then is  a  category for  which FA  is the associated linear graph.

We  shall now  give an exact definition.

Definition 10.1.  Let "Ubea proper category. By  the subdivision of  13 we mean a  category *UA  defined as  follows. The objects of  *UA  are in  one-to-one correspondence with the  maps of  V;  the object corresponding to  a  map vE°0 will  be  denoted by  vA. Furthermore "UA  contains for  every map  v:  V\-&gt;ViE°0

- (i) the identity map i:  vA-&gt;vA;
- (ii) a  map v':  vA-*ivA;
- (iii) a  map i»v:  vA-h'k,a,

only subject to  the condition that for  every object F£1)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  category VA contains no  other maps than these. Composition in  "UA  need not be  defined as  no  two nonidentity maps can be  composed. Clearly VA  is also  proper.

As  the  orientation of  the 1-simplices of  the linear graph FA is independent of  the orientation of  the 1-simplices of F  it  follows that the categories 13 and 13* have isomorphic subdivisions. This isomorphism is  given by the correspondence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  every map i&gt;£13.  The categories 13A and 13*A will  be  identified under this isomorphism.

Example 10.2.  Let g  be  the  category of  abelian groups and let  the  functor Horn: g,  g-&gt;g be  as  in  Example 5.2b. Let 13 be  a  category consisting of  two objects Fi  and F2 and three maps ivx, iv2 and v:  Fi-»F2. Let  A,  B:  13-&gt;g  be two covariant functors. Consider the set  H(A, B)  where A  and B  are considered as  objects of  the  category g^.  An  element sEH(A, B)  is a  pair  of  maps sF,£Hom (A Vit BV{)  (i=l, 2)  such  that commutativity holds  in  the  diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For every two  elements s,  tEH(A, B)  their sum is  defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This addition converts the set  H(A, B) into an abelian group G.

In this definition of the object GEQ use was made of the fact that the functor Horn has its values in the category of  abelian groups. Hence in its present form this definition cannot be applied to functors which have their values in  another category. In  order to  overcome this difficulty we  shall now show  how  the  object GE£ may  be  obtained using only the following two  properties of  the functor Horn

- (i) the functor Horn is  contravariant in the first variable and covariant in  the second and
- (ii) the functor Horn has its  values in  a  category which is  13A-inverse. Clearly such a  definition can be  applied to  other categories as  well. Consider the diagrams

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Horn  (A Vi, Bv)                               Horn  (Av, B Vt) (10.2b)    Horn (A Vit IS  Vs)-&gt; Horn (AV,,B  V2)  &lt;-Horn (A Vi,  B Vt)

and let C:  VA-&gt;g be  the  contravariant functor which assigns to  every object or  map of  10.2a the group or  homomorphism of  10.2b straight underneath. Now  sEG if and  only  if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or  equivalently if  and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is  readily verified that this exactly means that G is  an  inverse limit of  the object CEQW,  where  *W  =  VA. Hence G may  be  defined in  terms of the  functors A, B  and Horn and inverse limits only.

11. Lifted functors. Following [2] we  shall now  describe a  procedure of obtaining new  functors from a  given one.
2. Let F: 3C-&gt;£  be  a  covariant functor and let V  be  a  proper category. Then the functor F  induces a  covariant functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

called  lifted.  The definition of  this lifted functor may  be  described by  the following pair of  diagrams

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v.  Vi-^VtE'U and a:  A -&gt;A'EXv are maps. The meaning of these diagrams is  that for  every object AEXv the object Pk^4 E£v is  the  covariant functor Pk^4 : V-&gt;£ which assigns (for  every map v:  Vi-&gt;V2EV) to the objects and  maps  of  (11.1a) the  corresponding objects and  maps in  the  first  row of (11.1b) and that for every map a:  A-&gt;A'EKv the map FvaE£v is  the natural transformation which assigns to  the objects of  (11.1a) the  corresponding  "vertical maps" of  (11.1b).

Replacing V  by  its  dual we  obtain a  lifted functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly for a contravariant functor F:  X-&gt;£  the contravariant lifted functors

may  be  obtained.

By  the  argument used in  §4 this  may be  generalized to  functors involving additional variables. The  lifted functors then involve the  same  extra variables with the  same variance. For instance a  functor T:  y, Z-&gt;9C  contravariant in ■y  and covariant in  Z  induces a  lifted functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

contravariant in  yv and covariant in  Z,  which is  defined by  the diagrams

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  v:  Fi-&gt;F2£13, I: L'^LE^v and  z: Z-&gt;Z'EZ  are  maps.

Notational convention 11.3.  A lifted functor will  always have the  same  additional index in  the  same position as  its  range category. This will  also  apply to the  lifted  functors defined  below.

In the lifted functors defined above only one variable was lifted. These functors will  be  referred to  as  lifted  in  one  variable.

For a functor in two variables we  shall now define functors which are lifted in  two variables simultaneously. Use  will  be  made of  the notion of  subdivision of  a  category.

Let S: X,  y-&gt;Z  be a  covariant functor, let 13 be a proper category and let  W =  13A. Then a  (covariant) lifted functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  defined by  the  diagrams

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  v:  Fi-&gt;F2E13, m:  M-^M'EXV and  I: L^L'Eyv are  maps.

Replacing 13 by its dual we  obtain (because W =  13A  =  T3*A) another covariant lifted functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly a  functor T:  y, Z-&gt;9C,  contravariant in  *y and covariant in  Z induces lifted functors

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

both contravariant in  the first variable and covariant in  the second.

Example 11.5. Let g  be  the category of  abelian groups, let the functor Horn: g,  g-&gt;g be  as  in  Example 5.2b and let the proper category 13, the  covariant functors A, B:  13--&gt;g and the contravariant functor C:  13-&gt;g  be as in  Example 10.2. Let  *W = 13A.Then it is readily  verified  that  C = Uomw (A,B).

12.  Existence theorems. Sufficient conditions will  be  given in  order that a  functor lifted in  one  variable has  a  left  or  right adjoint. The  theorems stated are special cases of  the corresponding theorems for the relative case which will  be  obtained in  §13.

Let a:  S(X)-\T(Z). Then for  every proper category 13 the lifted functor TY: Zk-&gt;9Ck has  a  left  adjoint and the lifted functor Sy:  9Ck-&gt;Zk has  a  right adjoint, in  fact we  have:

Theorem 12.1. Let  a:  S(X)-\T(Z) and let  13 be  a  proper category. Then there  exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let X be  a  It-direct category and let 13 be  a  proper category. Let 3:  (Xu)v -*(Xv)u  he  the isomorphism which assigns to every object KE(Xu)v the object 3KE(Xv)u given  by  ((SK)  U) V=  (KV)  U lor  every object [/Gil and FG13. Let  Eu:  9C-&gt;9Cr/ be the  embedding functor used  in  the definition of direct limit. Compose the functor $  with the lifted functor (Ev)vThen it is readily verified that the composite functor d(Ev)v: Xv-*(Xv)u is  also such an embedding functor. Hence application of the Theorems 7.8 and 12.1 yields

Corollary 12.2.  Let X  be a  category  and let  11 and 13 be proper categories. If  X is  "Mi-direct, then  so is  Xv.

Theorem 12.1  may be  generalized to  functors in  two variables as  follows.

Theorem 12.3. Let  a:  S(X, y)~\T(y, Z)  and let  V  be  a  proper category. Then there  exists a  natural equivalence i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let a:S(X, y)~\T(y, Z).  Then in  general the functor Tr: yv, Z-&gt;9CV, lifted in  the variable *y has no  left adjoint. This is  however the case if  the category Z  is  1)A-direct. In  fact we  have

Theorem 12.4.  Let  a:  S(X, y)  -\  T(y, Z),  let  13  be a  proper category  and  let W =  13A. If the  category Z  is "W'-direct,  then there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.  a0:limwSw(Xv, yv)-\Tv(yv, Z).

And  by  duality

Theorem 12.4*. Let  a:  S(X, y)\-T(y, Z), let  13 be a  proper category  and let W =  13A.  If  the category  X is  ^-inverse, then  there  exists  a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  Theorems 12.1,  12.3  and 12.4  follow immediately from the analogous theorems for the relative case (13.4, 13.5  and 13.8) by putting

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

13.  The relative case. We  shall now  extend the  existence theorems of  §12
2. to  the relative case.

Definition 13.1. Let W  be a proper category. A covariant functor

F:  £-&gt;3l will  be  called  ^-inverse if

- (i)   £  is  W-inverse;
- (ii)   31 is  W-inverse;
- (iii)    F  commutes with inverse limits, i.e.  there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that commutativity holds in  the diagram

<!-- image -->

Examples 13.2. Examples of functors which are "W-inverse for every proper category 'W are

- (a) the  identity functor E:  3TC-&gt;3Tl,
- (b) the functor F:  g-»3TC  (see Example 5.2b) which assigns to every abelian group its  underlying set,  and
- (c) the functor F:  6L-&gt;9TC (see Example 5.2c) which assigns to every topological space its  underlying set.

Lemma 13.3. Let Q:  X,  X-&gt;£ be  a  hom-functor rel. F, let  V  be  a  proper category  and let  W =  13A. If  the functor F:  £-»9TC is  °W-inverse,  then  there  exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.  limwQw: Xv,  Xy-&gt;£ is  also  a  hom-functor rel.  F.

Theorem 13.4.  Let 8:  S(X)  H P(Z) rel.  F,  let  V  be a  proper  category  and  let W =  13A. If  the functor F:  £-&gt;9TC is  VP-inverse,  then  there  exists a  natural equiva1/671CC

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.,  in  view of Lemma 13.3,  8':  Sv(Xv)  H Pk(Zk) rel.  F.

Theorem 13.5.  Let  8:  S(X,  y)~\T(y, Z)  rel.  F,  let  V  be a  proper  category and  let  V? =  13A.  If  the functor F:  £-»9TC is  VP-inverse,  then  there  exists  a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.,  in  view of Lemma 13.3,  8''■  SV(XV, y)  H Tv(y, Zk)  rel.  F.

Definition 13.6. A  covariant functor F:  £-»3t  will be called true if "Fl is  an  equivalence" implies "/  is  an equivalence."

Examples 13.7.  Examples of  a  true functor are:

- (a) the  identity functor E:  3TC^3TC;
- (b) the functor F:  g-&gt;37l (see Example 5.2b) which assigns to every abelian group its underlying set.

The functor F: a-&gt;3TC  (see Example 5.2c) which assigns to every topological space its  underlying set is  not  true.

Theorem 13.8.  Let  8:  S(X,  y)-\T(y, Z)  rel.  F,  let  V  be a  proper  category and  let  W =  13A. If  the functor F: £-&gt;3H  is  true  and W-intverse and  the  category Z  is  *W-direct,  then  there  exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.  80:  limw  SW(XV, yv)^Tv(yv, Z)  rel.  F.

Theorem 13.8*.  Let /3: S(X,  y)-\T(y, Z)  rel.  F,  let  V  be a  proper  category and let  V? =  13A. If the functor F:  £-&gt;3TC is  true and ^-inverse and the  category

X is  ^-inverse, then  there  exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Example 13.9.  Let  the  functors Horn:  g,  g-&gt;g, ®:  g,  g-&gt;g  and  F:  g-^Edc and the natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be  as  in  Example 5.7. Let F  be  a  multiplicative system with unit element. Each element vEV gives rise to a  transformation v:  F-&gt;F  defined by v(x) = vx.  Let 13 denote the proper category which has one  object F  and has the transformations v as  maps. Then gv(resp. g7)  is the  category of  abelian groups with F  as left (resp. right) operators. Let W =  13A, then the category g  is both W-direct and "W-inverse and the functor F  is  W-inverse. The functor F is  also true. Hence we  may apply Theorems 13.5,  13.8  and 13.8*.

It is  readily verified with comparison with the usual definitions (see [l]) that

- (i) the functor ®v:  £v, g-&gt;£v  assigns to every group with operators AEQr and every group -BE9 their tensor product A  ®B with operators induced  by  those  of A,
- (ii) the functor &lt;8&gt;y: g, 9v-»gr  assigns to every group AE$ and every group with operators BEQv their tensor product A®B with operators induced  by  those  of B,
- (iii) the functor \imw  ®w:^v, %v~*9 assigns to every right-F-group ^4G9V  and every left-F-group BEQv their tensor product A ®vB  over F,
- (iv) the  functor Homy: g,  gy-&gt;gy assigns to  every group A £g and  group with operators -BEgy the  group Horn (A,  B)  with operators induced by  those of B,
- (v) the functor Horn7: Qv,  S-&gt;SV assigns to every group with operators AE£v and every group BE£ the group Horn (A,  B)  with operators induced by  those  of A,
- (vi) the functor limTr  Horn"7: gy,  gy-»g assigns to  every two groups with operators A,  BEQv the group Homy (A,  B) of  equivariant homomorphisms A^&gt;B,  and
- (vii) the functor lim17 Horn"': Qv, gr-&gt;g assigns to  every two  groups with operators A,  BEQV the group Homy (A,  B) of  equivariant homomorphisms A^B.

Application of Theorems 13.5,  13.8 and  13.8* thus  yields  that there  exist natural equivalences

$$ft':  Horn y(£y 9  S, 9v) -»  Horn v(%v,  Horn  (g,  gy)),$$

$$fto: Horn  (<3V ®v £v, 9) -»  Homy  (£v,  Horn  (gy,  g)),$$

$$ft0: Homy  (g  <8> £v, $v)  -*  Horn  (g,  Homy  (£v,  $v)),$$

i.e.

or  equivalently such  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e./determines an  element 7"/Glim* HW(K, K'). Straightforward computation now  yields that the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so  defined in  a  natural equivalence.

Because Q is  a  hom-functor rel. F  there exists a  natural equivalence.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This induces a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of  the lifted functors, given by  yw(K, K')vA  =y(KVu K'V2) for  every object K,  K'EXv and  every map  v:  Vi-»F2G13.  Composition of  the natural equivalence x (P  is  W-inverse) with the lifted functor QW(XV, Xv) yields a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The composite natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 13.3. We first consider the case where £=3TC, F = E:  3TC-»9TC, the  identity functor  and  Q  = H:  X,  9C-&gt;311. Let  X,  X'GSCk be objects. An  element f EH(K, K') is  a  function which  assigns to  every object VEV  a mapfVEH(KV, K'V)  such  that for every  map  v.  Fi-&gt;F2G13  commutativity holds in  the  diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence/ assigns to  every map  v:  Vi-&gt;F2G 13 an  element

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then clearly is  the desired one.

Proof of  Theorem 13.4. It is  readily verified that the natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

induces a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

given  by  ftw(K,  L)vA  =ft(KVu LV2) ior  every  object  KEXV,  and  LEZV  and every map v:  Fi-»F2E:13.  Composition of  ftw  with the functor lim'7:  £w-»£ then yields the desired natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  proof  of  Theorem 13.5  is  similar.

For the proof of  Theorem 13.8  we  need the following lemma.

Lemma  13.10.  Let  R:  Z,  Z-&gt;£ be a  hom-functor rel.  F.  and let  V? be a proper category. If the  category Z  is  V?-direct and the  functor F:  £-&gt;3TC is  true and V?-inverse, then  there  exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of  Theorem 13.8.  It  is  readily verified that the natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

induces a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

given  by  ftw(K,  L,  Z)vA=ft(KV2,  LVU Z)  for  every  object  KEXV,  LEyv and ZEZ and every map v:  Vi-&gt;F2E13.  Then composition of the functor lim17:  £17-&gt;£ with ftw  and of  the functor 5iy(9C7,  yv) with &lt;pR (see  Lemma 13.10) yields natural equivalences

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the theorem follows by putting

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of  Lemma 13.10. We first consider the case where £  =  3TC,  F = £:  3TC-&gt;3TC, the identity functor and  R=H: Z,  Z-»£. Composition of  the natural transformation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the functor Hw:  Zw,  Z-^&gt;£w  yields a  natural transformation

Denote by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the  unique natural transformation such that commutativity holds in  the diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i  is  the identity. It  then may be  verified by  straightforward computation that &lt;j&gt;H is  a  natural equivalence.

Replacing everywhere H  by  R  we  obtain a  unique natural transformation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that commutativity holds in the diagram obtained from (13.11) by replacing H  by  R.  Because R  is  a  hom-functor rel. F  there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This induces a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

given  by  8W(K, Z)vA = 8(KvA, Z)  for  every  object  XGZ^, ZGZ and  z&gt;AGW. Now consider Figure I,  in  which i  denotes the identity. It follows from the definitions of (J&gt;h  and 4&gt;r that commutativity holds in  the lower and upper rectangles, from the definition of 5* that commutativity holds in the big rectangle and in  (B). Because P  is  W-inverse commutativity also  holds in  (A) and consequently

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence in  view of  the uniqueness of  &lt;j&gt;h

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As  5, % and &lt;j&gt;n are natural equivalences it  follows that F&lt;pR  is  so.  Because P is  true this implies that &lt;pR  is  also a  natural equivalence. This completes the proof.

14.  The  functor H.  Let Z be  a  category. It  will  be  shown that a  sufficient condition in  order that the functor H: Z,  Z-&gt;3TC has  a  left  adjoint is  that the category Z has  direct limits. It  then follows from Theorem 12.3  that, for  every proper category 13, the lifted functor Hv: Zv,  Z-&gt;9TCy also  has a  left adjoint.

Figure I

<!-- image -->

The  converse also  holds, i.e.  if  for  every property category 13  the  lifted functor Hv: Zv, Z-^'SK  has a left adjoint, then Z  has direct limits. Several known functors involving c.s.s. complexes may be obtained from Hv(Zv, Z) for suitable categories 13 and Z  or  from a  left adjoint of  such a  functor. These applications will  be  dealt with  in [5].

Let 13 be a  proper category. With each object CE9TC7 we  associate a proper category e, defined as  follows. The objects of  6  are the pairs (V, c) where FE13 is  an  object and cECV. The maps of  Q are the triples (v,  cu  c2) where v:  Vi-&gt;F2£13  is  a  map, CiECVi, C2ECV2  and (Cti)ci = c2; the  domain of (v,  Ci, c2) is  (Fi, ci)  and the range is  (F2, c2).  If (v',  c2, c3):  (F2,  c2)-&gt;(F3,  c3) is  another map, then composition is  defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A  map  a:  C-&gt;Z?E3TC7 induces a  covariant functor a0:  C-&gt;3D defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  every object (F, c)  and  map (v, cu  c2):  (Fi, Ci)-&gt;(F2,  c2) in  &amp;.

For every object CE3TC7 define a  covariant functor C°:  Q^&gt;V  by  restriction to  the first  coordinate, i.e.

i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  every object (V, c)  and map (v,  c\,  c2) in  6.  Clearly for  each map a:  C-*D G3ftF

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now define a  covariant functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as  follows;  for  each  object CG9TCF  and  KEZv

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where KC°: C-&gt;Z  denotes the  composite functor; for  every map  a:  C-&gt;P&gt;G3TCF and  k:K-^K'EZv

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where kC°:  KCa-J&gt;K'D°a° is  the natural transformation from the composite functor KC°:  C-*Z to  the  composite functor K'D°a0  = K'C°: C-&gt;Z.

Theorem 14.1.  A  category Z has  direct limits if  and only  if for  every  proper category 13 there  exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combination of  Theorem 14.1 with  Theorem 12.4 yields

Corollary 14.2.  Let Z  have  direct limits, let  V  be  a  proper category and let "W  =  13A. Then there  exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  S(3U,  Z) =limi (&lt;3K°®dZo)  is  a  left  adjoint of the functor H:  Z,  Z-&gt;3H.

For the proof of  Theorem 14.1  we  need the following lemma.

Lemma 14.3.  Let  Z  be a  category and let  V  be a  proper category. Then  there exists a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of  Theorem 14.1. Let Z  have direct limits. Composition of the natural equivalence ad:  lim,*-I Ed with the functor ®d  yields a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly the composite natural equivalence

[March

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then is  the desired one.

Now  suppose that for  every proper category 13 a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  given. Let  PE9TC  he  a  set  consisting of  one  element p.  Let  X£Zy and  ZEZ be  objects. An  element fEH(EvP, Hr(K, Z)) then is  a  function which assigns to  every object VE  13 a  map/F: P^&gt;H(KV, Z)  subject to  certain naturality  conditions.  Denote  by 8fEH(K, EVZ) the map defined by (8/) F=  (fV)p for  every object VEV. It then is  readily verified that the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so  defined is  a  natural equivalence. Now  composition of the natural equivalence ft  with 5 yields a  natural equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence Z  is  13-direct. This completes the proof.

Proof  of Lemma 14.3.  Let  CE3TC7,  XEZy and  ZEZ be objects. For  every map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in  Zd define  a  map  y(0c,  /): C^IP(K, Z)  in  3TC7 by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  every object (V,  c)E&amp;It  then may  be  verified by  straightforward computation that the function y(Oc,f) so  defined is  an  equivalence in  9TC7 and that the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so  defined is  a  natural equivalence.

## Bibliography

1.  H. Cartan and S.  Eilenberg, Homological algebra, Princeton University Press, 1956.
2. S.  Eilenberg and  S.  MacLane, General  theory  of natural equivalences, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 58 (1945) pp. 231-294.
3.  S.  Eilenberg and N. Steenrod, Foundations of  algebraic topology, Princeton University Press,  1952.
4.  I.  M. James,  On the suspension  triad,  Ann.  of Math.  vol.  63 (1956) pp.  191-247.
5. D.  M.  Kan, Functors involving  c.s.s.  complexes,  Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.  vol.  87  (1958) pp. 330-346.
6. J.-P. Serre,  Homologie  singuliere des  espacesfibrts, Ann.  of  Math. vol.  54  (1951)  pp.  425505.

Columbia University,

New  York, N.  Y.
