I '

!

,

,

,

.,

,

,

"

,

I

"

"

## OUTLINE OF A MATHEMATICAL THEORY OF COMPUTATION

by Dana Scott

'1

:1

"

'I

!

"

:1

:1

'I

I'

,

,

;;

II

I

;1

! I

I

I

:I

,

## Oxford University Computing Laboratory Programming Research Group

-

,

"

:1

i

"

,

J

"

,I

:'

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

OUTL1NE OF  A MATHEMAT1CAL  THEORY OF COMPUTATION

by

Dana  Scott Princeton  Univers i ty

Technical  Monograph  PRG-2 November  1970

Oxford  University  Computing  Laboratory. Programming  Research  Group. 4S  Banbury  Road. Oxford.

## © 1970  by  Dana  Scott

Department  of  Philosophy, 1879  Hall, Princeton  University, Princeton,  New  Jersey,  08540.

This  paper  is  a revised  and  slightly  expanded  version of  a  paper  under  the  same  title  in  the  Proceedings of  the  Fourth Annual  Princeton  Conference  on  Information  Sciences and  Systems (1970) .

## ABSTRACT

This paper  introduces  a  theory  of  computation  which is mathematical rather  than operational in  its  approach. The  theory  is  based  on  the  idea  that  data  types  can  be  partial­ ly  ordered  by  a relation  similar  to  that  of  approximation, and  as  a  resul t can  be  considered  as  complete  lattices. The properties  of  these  lattices  and  the  functions  on  them  are discussed  in  an  informal  manner  and  shown  to  be  very  suit­ able  for  developing  a  mathematical  theory  of  the  semantics of  programming  languages. A  preliminary  result  of  this approach  is  the  construction  of  the  first  "mathematical" model  for  the A-calculus.

## CONTENTS

|    |                                 | ~   |
|----|---------------------------------|-----|
| O. | Introduction                    |     |
| 1. | The Problem of Self-Application | 4   |
| 2. | Data Types and Mappings         | 6   |
| 3. | Completeness and Continuity     | 9   |
| 4. | Computability                   | 12  |
| 5. | Construction of Data Typ~s      | 15  |
| 6. | Conclusion                      | 21  |
|    | Background and References       | 00  |

## OUTLINE MAT  HEM  ATIC AL  THE  0 RY

## o F A o F COM  PUT  AT ION

## D.

## INTRODUCTION

The  motivation  for  trying  to  formulate  a  mathematical theory  of  computation  is  to  give mathematicaZ  semantics for high-level  computer  languages. The  word  "mathematical"  is  to be  contrasted  in  this  context  with  some  such  term  as  "operational". Thus  the  mathematical  meaning  of  a procedure ought  to  be  the function from  elements  of  the  data  type  of  the  input  variables  to elements  of  the  data  type  of  the  output. On the  other  hand,  the operational  meaning  will  generally  provide  a trace of  the  whole history of  the  computation  following  the  seqtlencing  stipulated in  the  stated  procedure  definition  and  will  involve  an  explicit finitary  choice  of representations of  data eventually  in  some­ thing  close  to  bit  patterns. The  point  is  that,  mathematically speaking,  functions  are  independent  of  their mea~s of  computation and  hence  are  "simpler"  than  the  explicitly  generated,  step-by-step evolved  sequences  of  operations  on  representations. In  giving precise  definitions  of  operational  semantics  there  are  always  to  be made  more  or less  arbitrary  choices  of  schemes  for  cataloging partial  results  and  the  links  between  phases  of  the  calculation (cf.  the  formal  definitions  of  such  languages  as  PL/I  and  A.LGOL 68) and  to  a  great  extent  these  choices  are  irrelevant  for  a  true "understanding"  of  a  program. ~fathematical semantics  tries  to avoid  these irrelevancies  and  should  be  more  suitable  to  a  study of  such  problems  as  the ~quival~nc~ of  programs.

It is  all  very  well  to  aim  for  a  more  "abstract"  and  a "cleaner"  approach  to  semantics.  but  if  the  plan  is to  be  any good,  the  operational  aspects  cannot  be  completely  ignored. The reason  is  obvious: in  the  end  the  program  still  must  be run  on  a machine  a  machine  which  does  not  possess  the  benefit  of "abstract"  human  understanding,  a  machine  that  must operate  with finite  configurations. Therefore,  a  mathematical  semantics, which  \l"i11  represent  the  first  major  segment  of the complete, rigorous  definition  of  a  programming  language,  must lead  naturally to  an  operational  simulation  of  the  abstract  enti ties.  which (if done  properly)  will  establish  the  practicality  of  the  language,  and which  is  necessary  for  a  full  presentation.

Thinking  only  of  functions  for  the  moment, it is  clear that  a  mathematically  defined  function  can  be  known to  be computab~e without  its  being  quite  obvious }ww to  compute  the  function  in  a practical  sense  just  as  it  is  possible  to  know  that  an  infinite series is  convergent  wi thout  having  a  clear  idea  of  its  sum. Even  though  the  abstract  definition  of  the  function is  sufficient to  determine  it,  we cannot  really  say  that  the  fum:tion  is kno1Jn until  the  algorithm  is  revealed. (Even  then  our  knowledge  is somewhat  "indirect"  or  "potential",  but  never  mind.) The  con­ clusion  is,  then, that  an adequate theory  of  computation  must  not only  provide  the  abstractions (what is  computable)  but  also  their "physical"  realizations  (how  to  compute  them).

What is  new  in  the  present  theory  is  exactly these abstr'adions; whereas  the  means  of  realization,  the techniques of  implementation,  have  been  known  for  some  time,  as the  many, highly complex  compilers  that  are  presently  in  operation  demon­ strate. Of  course,  new  concepts  may  require (or  suggest)  new methods  of  implementation,  but  that  remains to  be  seen. However, notice  this  essential  point: unless  there  is  a  prior,  generally accepted  mathematical  definition  of  a language  at  hand,  who is  to say  whether  a  proposed  implementation  is  correct? What is  the "standard"  against  which  a realization  is  to  be  measured? Now it  is  often  suggested  that  the  meaning  of  the  language  resides

in  one  particular compiler  for  it. But  that  idea  is  wrong: the "same"  language  can  have  many  "different"  compilers. The  person who  wrote  one  of these  compilers  obviously  had  a (hopefully)  clear understanding  of  the  language  to  guide  him,  and  it  is  the  purpose of  mathematical  semantics  to  make  this  underst3nding  "visible". This  visibility  is  to  be  achieved  by  abstracting  the  central  ideas into  mathematical  entities.  which  can  then  be  "manipulated"  in  the familiar  mathematical  manner. Even  if  the  compiler-oriented  approach (even  compiled  to  run  on  an  "abstract"  machine)  were  transparent  ­ which  it  is  not  there  would  still  be  interest  in  bringing  out  the abstractions  to connect  the  theory  with  standard  mathematical  practice.

## 1. THE PROBLEM OF SElF-APPUCATION

Having  this  obviously  desirable  mathematical theory  seems to  require  some  new  structural  notions,  some  new insights  into  the nature  of data  types and  the fu.nctions (mappings)  that  are  to  be allowed  from  one  to  another. ~Ioreover. it  soon  be.comes  clear  in thinking  about  "higher-type"  programming  concepts  (e. g.  procedures) that  spaces  of  functions  must  also  be  considered  as forming  data types. Since  a function  (say,  mapping  integers  to integers)  is generally  in  itself  an  infinite  object.  it  also  becomes  necessary to  introduce  some  idea  of  finite approximation -just  as  we  do  in a sense  for  real  numbers. On top  of  this  there  are already operationally  "defined"  concepts  of  function  which  seem  to  have no mathematical  counterparts. In  particular  it  is  not unknown  in programming  languages  to  allow unrestricted procedures  which  can very  well  produce  unrestricted  procedures  as  values. Speaking mathematically  this  is  tantamount  to  allowing  a function  that  is  to be  well  defined  on all allowable  functions  as  arguments  a kind  of super-functional  and  which  is  even  applicable  to it;self as an argument. To  date  no  mathematical  theory  of  functions  has  ever been  able  to  supply  conveniently  such  a  free-wheeling  notion  of function  except  at  the  cost  of  being  inconsistent. The  main mathematical novelty  of  the  present  study  is  the  creation  of  the proper mathematical  theory  of  functions  which  accomplishes  these aims (consistently!)  and  which  can  be  used  as  the  basis  for  the meta­ mathematical project  of  providing  the  "correct"  approach  to  semantics.

It  should  be  stressed  at  once  that  the  problem  of Belf­ application arises  in  ways  more  crucial  to  the  interpretation  of programming  languages  than  in  the  contemplation  of  the  (to  some, impractical)  unrestricted  procedures. The  problem  concerns  the related  questions  of  keeping  track  of Bide  effects and  of  the storage  of  commands. In  the  first  place,  what is  a store? Physically,  we  have  several  remarkable  answers,  but  mathematically it com~s down  to  being  simply  a mapping (a  function) which  connects contenB to locations. Speaking  more  precisely,  the (current)

state of  the  store,  call  it  0,  is  mathematically  a function:

o : l ... V

which  assigns  to  each  location  1  E  l (the  set  of  all  locations) its  (current)  contents  o(£)  E  V  (the  set  of  all  allowable  values). Let S  be  the  set of  all  states. What is a side  effeC!t? Obviously a change of  state. What is  a C!ommand? A request for  a  side effect. More  mathematically,  a  command  is  a  function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which  transforms (old)  states  into  (new) states.

Question: can  a command  be  stored? Answer: well,  we  do it operationally all  the  time. Question: is  that  mathematically justified? Let's see. Suppose  0 is  the  current  state  of  the store,  and  suppose  1  E  l is  a location  at  which  a command  is  stored. Then  0(1)  is  a comma!J.d; that  is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, 0(1)(0) is  well  defined. Or  is  it? This  is  just  an  in­ significant  step  away  from  the  self-application  problem  pCp)  for "unrestricted"  procedures  p,  and  it  is  just  as  hard  to  justify mathematically. Of  course. in  the  operational  approach  we  do not store  the  command  itself  as  a function  but  rather  a "code  word"  or "piece  of  text"  that  stands  for  the  command  in  an  unambiguolJs  way. But  to  carry  out  the  formal  description  of  how  this  works  especially for  compound  commands  depending  on  parameters  involves  us  in  most of  the  nasty  questions  of  programming  language  semantics  and  is  not really  a  satisfactory  conceptual  way  out.

## 2. DATA TYPES AND  MAPPINGS

Getting  down  to  particulars,  we  must  ask: what  exactly is  a dc;;ta type? To simplify  matters,  we can  identify  a  data type  with  the  set  D  of  all  objects  of  that  type. But  this  is  in itself too  simple: the  objects are structured  and  bear  certain relations  to  one  another,  so  the  type  is  something  more  than  a set. Now this  structuring  must  not  be  confused  with  the  idea of data 6tl'I.H~tu.l'eS (lists,  trees,  graphs,  etc.); these  will  come in  later. The  kind  of  structure  being  discussed  he re  is  much more  primitive  and  more  general  and  has  to  do  with  the  basic  sense of approximation. Suppose  or, lj  E 0  are  two  elements  of  the  data type,  then  the  idea  is  not immediately  to  think  of  them  as  being completely separate entities  just  because  they  may  be different. Instead y, say,  may  be  a better version  of  what  ;r  is trying  to approximate. In  fact, let  us  write  the  relationship

## x ~ y

to  meaTI intlLitively  that y is consistent  with  x and is  (possibly) more  qccurate  than  x. For  short  we can  say  that x appI'oximate6  y. This  iTItuitively  understood  relationship  exists  on  most  data  types naturally,  and  it  is  part  of  the  thesis  of  this  paper  that &lt;i data type  should alwaylJ be  provided  with  such  a relationship. This  may require  some  adjustment  of  thought  to  accommodate  certain  standard ideas,  but  it  seems  worth  the  effort  to  unify  the  treatment  of various  types.

So  let  us  agree  for  the  sake  of  argument  that  types  0  are structured  by  relations C; (at  least). What  can  we say  abstractly about  such  a  relationship? With  reference  to  the  intuitive understanding,  it  is  clear  that  we want  to  assume  that ~ is reflexive. tl'anlJitive. and antisymmetl'ic.

AXIOM~. A  data  type  is a  partially  ordered set. (partially  ordered  sets  are  so  very

That  may  not  seem  like  much general)  but  it  is  slight  progress. The  next  bit  of  progress should  concern  mappings.

Suppose  0 and  0'  are  two  data  types (with  appropriate partial  orderings ~ and r;;::  '). Suppose f: 0 -&gt;-0'  is  a reasonablE' mapping  of  the  elements  of  the  one  into  the  other. Should  thE're be  anything  to  say  in  general  about  properties  of  mappings? Well. suppose :1:, y E D  and x ~ y. If [ were  a function  defined  by  a program  in  any  of  the  usual  ways, it  would  be  sensitive  to  thE' accuracy  of  its  arguments (inputs]  in  a special  way: the  more accurate  the  input,  the  more ac~urate the  output. In  symbols:

## x r;;:: y implies [(x) 1;.' fry),

In  other  words, with  respect  to  the  partial  orderings f is  monotonic. We make  this  an axiom  also:

## AXIOM 2 Mappings  between dat~ types  are  monotonic.

Note  that  such a condition  easily  generalizes  to  functions  of several  variables,  even  variables  of  mixed  types.

In  numerical  computation  Axiom  2  is  sometimES  denied,  but this  is  a confusion  about  the  use  of  the  word aC'curacy. It  is true  that  we know  some  clever  asymptotic  algorithms  which  give better answers  when  the  accuracy  is cruder, but  they  should  be considered  as functions  of two variables: the  usual  input  data together  with  a parameter  indicating  the  degree  of  accuracy  or maybe  better  the  number  of  "terms"  to  be  selected  from  the "expansion". It  can  certainly  happen  that  taking  more  terms just  ruins  the  already  good  approximation,  but  note  that  the input  and  the  number  of  terms  are  already  supposed  known perfectly. The  notion  of  accuracy  we are  trying  to  capture  with  the  r;;:: relation  is  something  else  and  does not depend  on  this  presup­ position. Maybe  it  would  be  better  to  talk  about infol'matl:on; thus, x r;;. y means  that x and y want  to  approximate  the  same entity,  but y gives more information  about  it. This  means  we have  to  allow  "incomplete"  entities,  like x, containing  only "partial"  information. (The  way  to  do  this  in  numerical  cal­ culation  is  called interval  analysis. but  we do  not  have  the space  here  to  be  more  specific.) Allowing  for  partiality of

arguments  and  values  has  the  good  effect  that  our  functions  become F'aT·t.iai too; for  even  if the arguments  aTe  perfect  the  values  may only  be  partial. This i~ necessary  in  considering  algorithmically defined  functions,  since  for  some  combinations  of  arguments  it  may happen  that  the  algori thm  docs  not  "converge". As a consequence of this  point  of  view,  then,  there  can  he  no  numcrical  function  of the  kind  allo..·ed by Axiom  2  ...hich  maps a "partial"  real  number  to  an\_ integer  exponent  representing  the  degree  of  accuracy. But  this  is not  a  dra..back. as  can  be  seen  ;,'hen  one  examines  the  details  of  the method: there  are  sufficiently  many  monotonic  functions.

## 3. COMPLETENESS AND CONTINUITY

The  theory  based  on  Axioms 1  and 2  would  be  too  abstract, though  it  is  not  vacuous. We need  to  he  more  specific  about  the behaviour  of  approximations  for  the  applications  we have  in  mind. Thus suppos~ an infinite  sequence  of  approximations  is  such  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then  it  seems reasonable  to suppose that  the , aTE' tencling to Ii a l-:mi t. Call thc  limit  :'.  and  \o.'e I,r  i t E'

<!-- image -->

hecause  in  the sense  of  the  partial  ordering ~ the  limit  is naturally  taken  to  be the Zea~t uppe~ hound (l.u.b.), If  we imagine  the  successive  terms  of  the  sequence  as  giving  us  more and  more information,  than  the  limit  represents  a  kind  of  "union" or jo ~ of  the  separate  contributions. In  fact,  for  mathematical simplicity, \~'e assume  that euer!1 subset  of  the  data  type  has  a least  upper  bound,  which  anlounts  to:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  particular,  3S is  ....·ell  known, the  existence  of  arbitrary  least upper  bounds implies the exi~tcncc of  greatest  lower  hounds  (g.l.b.) \"hich  is  why  we say  we have a compI"te  lattice.

This last  assumption  require,;  some  explanation. In case :r,  yEO,  it  may  be  that  they  are  either  approximations  to  the same  "perfect"  entity  or  not, in  ,",'hieh  case  they  are  somehow  "incon­ sistent"  with  one  another. In an~' case  we are  assuming  t.1.cy  have a  l.u.b.  or .join xU  yEO. Even  worse,  we assume  that  the whole of  0 has a l.u.h.,  which  ,",'e  call  TEO. This T is  the  "top"  of the  lattice, the  very  "largest"  clement in  the  partial  oreering ~. It  is  not to  be  regarded  as  a "perfect"  E'IemE'nt,  but  rathcr  as an "over-determined"  clement. Ilence,  we can  regard  the  equation

as  me&lt;lning  intuitively  that x and  yare i1'!consistent;. This  is  to be  distinguished  from  the  much  weaker  relationship  of  being incompar­ able, ~hich is  simply: x q y and y q x.

The  l.u.b.  of  the empty suhset  of  our  data  type  0 is an element .1 E D. This is  the  "bottom"  of  the  latt ice, the  very "smallest"  element  in  the  partial  ordering. I t may be  regarded as the  most  "under  determined"  element. The  lou.b. of  the  set of  all lower  bounds  of  a subset X ~ D, is  the  g. 1. b. nx ED. For x,y E D I we have  the  meet x n y '" n{x~y} E D. We can  io­ tuitively  read  the  equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as  meaning  that x and y aTe unconnec-ted, is  no  "overlap"  of  information  between  them.

in  the  sense  that  there rather

f1aving supposed  that  the  data  type  permits  "limits",  we have  to  re-examine  our  view  of  functions. If  a function  is computable in  some  intuitive  sense,  then  getting  out a  "finite" amount  of  information  about  one  of  its  values  ought to  reqUire putting  in  only  a  "finite"  amount  of  information  about  the argument. Now our  notion  of  "information"  is quali-tative than qiwntitative, but  it  is  still  possible  to  express  this fundamental  idea  in  terms  of  the  notions  we  have  avai lab Ie .

First  of  all,  the  proper  notion  of limit is  expressed best  in  terms  of directed  sets. A  subset X .s. D is dirf](Jted every  Hni te  subset {,x ,x ' ··· ,x \_ } ~ X has  an  upper  bound O l n l y E X so that  I.ie have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note  that  a  directed  set  is  always  non-empty. (Hint:  take n = 0.) The li~it of  the  directed  set  is  the  l.u.h.  UX. Suppose  we want  a  "fini te"  amount  of  information  about  Ux. Each  lObi tit  we need  (arguing  very  intuitively)  is  contained  in  some element  of X; hence  by  the  directedness, all. of  it  is  contained  in at  least  one single element  of x.

if

Now consider  a  monotonic  function f: D -+ 0'. Given  a limit Ux  of  a  directed  subset X ~ D, \ole ask  for  a "finite"  amount of  information  about f( U X}. We agree  that  to  do  this  requires only  a  "finite"  amount  of  information  about UX;  thus  only  a single element x E X is needed,  and  it  is  such  that f(;r) gives  what  we  Want. Note  that !(x) '; flUX) and  that  {fLrJ:x  E  xl is  a  directed  sub­ set  of  D'. Al.l. the  information  about f(UX) ought to  be  the  "limit" of  its  "finite"  parts. Instead  of  speaking  intuitively  and  meta­ phorically,  we can expres5  the  idea by the mathematical. equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  words  we can say: the  mapping presel"ves the  limit. A  mapping that  preserves alZ limits  is  called continuous. What  \ole have motivated  is:

just

## AXIOM 4. Mappings  between  data  types  are  continuous.

A  function  of two variables  is  continuous  just  \oIhen  it  is continuous  in  each  of  its  variables  separately. Suppose g{:J:,y) is  such  a  function. It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  function!  defined by  the  equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  also  continuous. (Indeed  all  the  usual  methods  of composition and identification  of variabl.er; produce  continuous  functions  given continuous  functions.) The  example  of f ahove  is  the  easiest  \oIay to  obtain  a continuous  function  which  does not preserve arbitrary l.u.b's.  (with  a suitable  choice  of g). There  is  absolutely no  reason  to  suppose that  the  functions ought to  preserve  g.l.h.'s: one  cannot  expect  any  "smoothness"  while decreasing information. Hence  the  continuity  restriction  is  about  as  far  as  one  should  go in  giving general conditions  on  functions  that  have  a  chance  of being  computable.

## 4.

## COMPUTABILITY

So  much  for  the  broad  outlines  of  the  theory. I t still is to~ abstract,  however,  because  even  though  certain  essential pI'opeTtie~ of  computable  functions  have  been  isolated,  the  poss­ ibility  of  "physical" realization. has  not  yet  been assumed  in  any form. This  we  must do. The  problem  is  to  restrict  attention  to exactly  those  data  types  where  the  elements  can  be  approximated by  "finite  configurations"  representable  in  machines,  thereby  also making  more  precise  the  concept  of  a  "finite  amount of  information".

The  solution  to  this  problem  is  to  take  a topological approach: in  any  case  our  previous  mention  of Z-imi"t3 and ~on­ tinuity ought  to  have  suggested  that  there  are  some topological ideas  in the background. Indeed,  any  data  type  D  satisfying Axioms  1  and  3  can  be  regarded  as  a  topological  space. To defin€  a topology  on  a set  one  needs  to  say  which  subsets  are ope71, In  the  case  of  the  data  type  0,  there  are  two  conditions to  be  satisfied  for  a subset U ~ D  to  be open:

- (U ) whenever :t' E If and :t' ~ y, then y E U; and l
- (U )  whenever I: C  0  is  directed  and  Ux  E u, then X n U'"  6. 2

It  is ~asy to  check  that  D  becomes  a topological  space  in  this  way. and that  f:D ~ D'  is  continuous  in  the limit  preserving sense  if and  only if  it  is  continuous  in  the topologicaL sense.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to  mean  that y belongs  to  the  topological interior of  the  upper section  determined by~; that  is,  the  interior  of  the  set {x' E D: x ~ x'}.

The  relationship  is  not  as irreflexive  as  it  looks. for  there  are iBoZar~l elements x of  certain  data  types  such  that  = ~ x. For example.i  .(.1. always  holds; it  is  probably  reasonable  to  assmne T is  lSolated  also. We  write

to  mean that  the  g.l.b.  of  the  topological  interior  of  the  UppPT section  u0tcrmined by x is ~~. Thus the  three  relationships

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

aTe successively  'WeaKer.

Taking  the  hint  from  topological  spaces like  the  real numbers (which  topologicallY  are  a bit  diffcrent  from  our  data­ type  sp.:u;:cs),  we consider  the  possibility  of  having  a ,iense subset  of  the  space  in  terms  of  which  all  the  other  elements  can be found  as  ] 1m! ts. We call  such  a subset  a h.lsi.~. definition  seems to  be  the  following: a subset  F ~ 0 is a b'.1sis

The  proper if  it  satisfies these  two  conditions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  example,

The  existence  of  a  basis  has  several  consequences; the  meet  operation  =n y is  continuous  if  a  basis exi~ts, and not  necessarily  continuous  otherwise.

Conditions (E I ) and (£2)  are  still  not  strong  enough. make  data  types  "physical". We need  the  stronger  assumption:

AXIOU· A data  type  has an effectively  given  basis.

That  is  to s~y the  set F must  be  "known". Given e,  e' E F, we have  to  know  how to  finl! the  element ~ U e' E E. Given e, ro'  E j&lt;;. we have  to  know  hOI'.  to  decide  hlhich  of  the rel~tion­ ships:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are true and which  are /r..Zsc. Th:is cert.1.inl} is  going  to  require that the  set E is  at  most countahly  infinite,  .1.nJ probably  that  we bave  an  effective  enumeration

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in  terms  of  ".,hich  the  ahoyc  oper;,tions  and relationships  are :'·"'c·urn·':e (in  the  technical  sense  of  recursion  theory). To  make the  data  type !',:a1I"i! physical  we ..'auld  need  to  as&lt;;IlJne all  1"('l:1tion­ Sllips  to  be  very  recursive  indeed,  but  we do not  have  to  go into

that  here: the  intuitive  idea  of  an  effectively  given  basis  can be  left  a  bit  vague  because  in  particular  examples it will  be  clear what  is  going  on.

Note  that  as  a consequence  of  Axiom  5  the  topologies  of  data types are separable because  not  only  is  there  a  countable  dense subset  (the  basis),  but  the  sets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for e E E form  a  countable  basis  for  the  topology  of  D.

The  most important  consequence  of  the  assumption  of  an effectively  given  basis  is  the  possibility  of  being able  to  define what  it  means for  an  element  to  be  computable. Suppose  xED and E is  the  basis. Then (relative  to  this  basis) :r is ~omputable if  and  only  if  there  is  an  effectively  given  sub-sequence.

{e~J e {J e ~. · e' ... }s: E ·· J n' such  that e' [ e' for  each n, and " ­ "" e' n=O x" U n·

This  m.eans that  we  must  be  able  to  give  effectively  better  and  better approximations  to x which  converge  to x in  the  limit. This is  an essential  notion; because,  for  one  thing,  it  may  very  well  be the case  th.at the  data  type  D  has unaountably many  elements,  while  there can  be  only aountably many  computable  elements. Note  that  there will  be in  general  many  sequences  converging  to  an  element x, so that jllst knowing  that :r is  computable  does  not  mean  that  the  "best" ... · ar  to  compute  it  is  also  known.

This  completes  the  discussion  of  the  foundations  of  the subject. Someone  may  want  to  point  out that  Axiom 3 implies  Axiom 1 and  ,uiOID  4  implies  Axiom  2  but  the  axioms  are  given  in  the  order in  which  the  ideas  naturally  occur. It  can  all  be said  very  quickly in  summary: data  types  are  complete  lattices  with  effectivelY  given bases  and  all  allowable  mappings  are  to  be  continuous.

## 5. CONSTRUCTION OF DATA TYPES

We must  now  look  into  the  construction  of useful data  types satisfying  the  axioms,  remembering  that  the  lattice  structure  is  only the  most  primitive  structure  on  a  data  type,  and  the  "interesting" structure  is  supplied by various  kinds  of  continuous  functions special  to  the  type. (In  the  examples  and  constructs  to  be  men­ tioned,  the  element  T  will  always  be  assumed isolated.)

In  the  first  place  all finite lattices  satisfy  the  axioms, and  fOT them  continui ty  plays  no  role. Of  course  finite  structures aTe  sufficient  for  "practical"  appl ications,  but  many  concepts  mOre easily  find  their  expression  with  reference  to  infinite  structures. In  the  case  of OUT lattices  there  are  the  two  numerical  data  types Nand  R  for  the integer6 and the real6. As a  lattice  N  has  for elements  O. 1, 2·...· n · ...  (these  elements  are  pairwise  incompar­ able  under ~) plus  the  two  elements  T and ~. respectively  ahove and  below  all  the  others (cf.  Fig.l). In  this  case  the  whole lattice  is  its  own  basis.

,

"

Figure  1. The Lattice  N.

<!-- image -->

For  R  the  elements  are ~loBed intervals [::£... xJ of  ordinary real  numbers (~~ x) plus  two  elements  T and ~. The  partial ordering  between  the  intervals  is  defined  thus:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(We use  the  abbreviation; ff in  place  of  the  phrase if and  only  if.) The  "perfect"  reals "e  the  one-point  intervals  [£, x] wi th :=. '" x. The  "apprOXimate"  reals  have E?-&lt; :r. (ef . Fig.2) .

<!-- image -->

L

Figure  2 The  Lattice  R

The  basis  consists  of  the  intervals  with :rational end  points  plus the element~. There  is  a  very  close  cOnnection  between  the continuous  funct ions  on  the  1at tice  R  and  the  ordinary  theory  of continuous  point functions. In  both  lattices  the  usual  arith­ metic  operations are  represented  by  continuous  functions,  and  it is  especially  interesting  to  consider  division  in  R. as  well  as other  functions with  singularities.  or  functions  that  are  normally left  undefined  over  part  of  their  domain.

Suppose  0 and  0'  are  two  given  data  types. There  are three  particularly  important  constructs:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  obtaining  new.  "structured"  data  types  from  the  given  ones. The  (cartesian) product 0  x  0'  has  as  elements pairs ~x,x') where  :c  E  0  and x' EO'.  and  for  which  we  define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The sum is  defined  as  a  "disjoint"  union  of  0  and  0',  except  that we identify  .1 =; Jand  T = T·. (eL  Fig.3.)

Figure  3. The  Lattice  0  + 0'

<!-- image -->

The f1J.natio71 spaoe (0 + 0') has  as  elements  all  the  continuous mappings  from  0  into  0', for  which  we  define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

What  one  must  check  is  how  the  effectively  given  bases  for  0  and OJ determine  the  basis  for  the  construct. This  is  easy fOT products  and  sums  but  somewhat  more  trouble  for  function  spaces.

Sums and  products  can  be  obviously  generalized  to  more terms  and  factors.  even  infinitely  many. For  example. On can be taken  as  the  set  of  all n~tuples of  elements  of partially ordered  in  the  ohvious  coordinate-wise  fashion. We  can  then  set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which  represents  the  data  type  of  all  finite lists of  elements of  the  given  O. Similarly  one  can  go  on  to  lists  of  lists  of lists of  .·.. If  this  were  done in  the  right  way, it would seem  reasonah Ie  that  a lattice  0'"  would  be  obtained  such  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that  is to  say,  each  element  of  0'"  is either an  element  of  the given 0 or is  a list  of  other  elements  of  0"'. This  sounds  very much  like  the  usual  kind  of  recursive  definition  of lists; but one  must  take  care  as  the  following  argument  shows.

It  is  a  well-known  theorem  that  every  continuous  (even monotonic) function  mapping  a  complete  lattice  into itself has a fi;r;ed  point. Applying  this  remark  to  the  supposed  0'"  above, we  note  that  for  fixed a E  0,  the  expression &lt;a.x&gt; defines  a continuous  function  of  oCO::&gt; into  itself. Consider  a fixed  point:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus :r is  a list  whose  first  term  is a and  whose  second  term is. ? The  second  term  is  the  list x itself! Thus x is  a kind  of  infinite  list:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which  is  illustrated  in  two  different  ways  in  Fig.4.

<!-- image -->

That  does  not  square  with  OUT usual  ideas  about  data  types  of lists,  but  is  it  bad? The answer  is rIO. FOT it  can  be  shown  that the  data  type Om does  in  fact  exist; it  contains  all  the  ordinary finite  lists  as  well  as  many  quite  interesting  and  useful limits of  sequences  of  finite  lists. One  might  say  that  0'"  gives  us the  topological completion of  the  space  of  finite  lists.  and  the various  limit  points  need  not  be  used  if  one  does  not  care  to take  advantage  of  them.

The  process  of  "completing"  spaces  is  a  very  general  one. and  the  full implications  of  the  method  require  further  explor­ ation. A second  example  of  the  completion  idea  concerns function spaces. Let  0  be  given. and  set  DO = 0  and

° ° and  is  such  that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  spaces n are  a  selection  of  the  "higher-type"  spaces  of functions  of  functions  of  functions  of  000 It  turns  out  that there  is  a natural  way  of  isomorphically  embedding  each  On  success­ ively  into  the  next  space  0n+10 These  emheddings  make it possible to pass to  a limit  space 0"",  which  contains  the  originally given

## ° 00 : (0"" -+ Om)'

(Strictly  speaking  this  surprising  equation  must be taken  with  a grain of  salt: it  is  only  true  "up  to  isomorphism"  which  is  good enough  for  our  purposes.) This  space  provides  the  solution  to the  self-application  problem  of  Section  1. because  each  element of  Da&gt;  can  be  regarded  as  a (continuous!)  function  on  0",  into  D"". And  conversely,  every  continuous  function  can  be  represented fai thfully  by  an  element. Technically  speaking  what  we  have here  is  the  first  known.  "mathematically"  defined model  of  the so-called A-~atcuZu8 of  Church  and  Curry.

The  reader  should  take  notice  of  the  fact  that  OUT abstractly  presented  theory  of  computable  elements of  lattices with  effectively  given  bases  applies  to  the function spaces. So  we  know  what  computable  functions  are. Even  better  we "know"  what  are  the  computable  elements  of  the  space  Om of functions  of  "infinite"  type. Clearly  the  calculus  of  operators which  can  be  used  to  generate  computable  functions is  going  to  be interesting,  and  this  brings  us  back  to  semantics  £or  programming languages. Indeed  the  natural  way  to  define  computable  functions is  within  the  context  of  a  suitable  programming  language. The ),,-calculus  itself  is  a  prograrrtming  language: it  is  the  pure language  of  "unrestricted"  procedures. It  is  only  one  of  the many  possible  languages.

## 6. CONCLUSION

We may now  sketch  the  solution  to  the "storage~of-commands" problem  mentioned  in  Section  1. Let L  be  the location space (finite  or,  if you like,  take  L  '" N, so  that  the  locations aTe indexed  by  the  integers). The spaCe  V  of values is  to  be  con­ structed by the limiting  methods  alluded  to  above. Supposing  it is  already  constructed.  the  space  S  of states  of  tIle stare is defined  by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  space  C  of command 8 is  de fined  by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  space  P  of p~ocedure8 -with  one  parameter  and  with effects -is  defined by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that  is,  a  procedure  is  a function,  which  given  first  a  value  of its  argument  and  next  given  a  state  of  the  store,  then  produces a "computed"  value  together  with  the  necessary  change  of  the  state of  the  store. Now  what  can those values  be? Well,  they  might be numbers (in  N or  in  R), or  they  might  be Zocations, or  they might  be lists, or  they  might  be commands, or  they  might  be prOCedUN!E. (Even  to  formalize  a mode  of  expression  for  such an  array  of  possible  types  of  values  would  already  require  a  fairly involved  programming  language.) We are  thus  led  to  write:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If one  substitutes  the  definitions  of  S,  C, and  P  into  this  equation, one  obtains  only  a slightly  more  complicated  "definition"  than  those m that we had for  Dm and D . Sue!; a space  V does  exist mathematicQZly~ and it provides  the  values  for  expressions  of  a  programming  language of  the  kind  we have  understood  previously  in  the  "operational" way. We should  at  once  begin  trying  to  understand  these  lanRuages  math­ ematically.  because  we  now  have  all  the  tools  to  do  so.

side

## 7. BACKGROUND  AND R£FERENCES

The  idea  of  using  monotonic  and  continuous functions  in connection  wi th  recursion  theory  has  been  current  for some time. The  author  believes,  however, that  his  use  of  the  idea  along with  more abstract  lattices  (in  particular: with  limits  of lattices)  is  new  and  adds  greater  flexibility  to  the  program,

The  first  published  references  that  the  author  knows  are a sequence  of  four  notes  by  Lacombe  in  the  mid-fifties  in  which he  im'estigates  the  notions  of  recursive  real number function  of  a  real  variable, The  method  is  essentially  the  same as OUT  use  of  the  lattice  R  sketched  above.

and  recursive The  exact  references are:

Daniel  Lacombe, Extension  de la n~tion de  fonction recursive  au.x  functions  d'unl? 014 plusieul'B  variables pedes I,  II,  Ill. Comptes rendus,  vol.  240  (l955), pp. 2478-80; vol.  241 (1955),  pp.  13-14;  vol.  20 (l955).  pp.  151-153.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, Remarques  surles  opeI'ateUI'B  I'ecul'sifs et  surles  function  I'eCUI'sives  d'une  variable  I'eele. Ibid.  vol. 241 C 1955),  pp.  1250-52.

to  the  author

The  author  is  indebted  to  G. Kreisel  for  pointing  out  these intensting  notes  to  him. The  idea  that  the  method  could  be extended  to  the  real  numbers  first  became  apparent in  reading  the  much later  book  on  numerical  analysis:

Ramon E.  Moore, Intwl'val  Analysis, 14 5  pp.

Prentice-Hall  (1966),

From  a different  direction  we  have  the  work:

Martin  Davis. Computable  functionals  of  arbitrary  finite type~ in  Constructivity  in  Mathematics (A. Heyting,  ed.). North  Holland  (1959),  pp.  281-284.

Here  the  important  step  is  taken  of  using  partial  functionals satisfying  a  consistency  condition. Davis  relates  his  ideas to  the continuous and  the cOl.lntable functions  of  Kreisel  and Kleene  (cf. their  papers  in  the  same  volume.) Note.  however,

that  kleene  and Kreisel  work  generally  with total £unctionals. a  restriction  that  is  not  convenient  for  the  type  of  applications the  author  has in mind  here.

Further  work  on  partial  functionals  is  contained  in:

A.  Nerode, Some  Stone  spaces  and  recursion  theory, Duke

Mathematical  Journal,  vol.  26 (1959),  pp.  397-406.

Both  Nerode  and  Davis  had  reported  on  their  ideas  at  the  Cornell Logic  Summer  School  in  1957. A  really  systematic  approach  did not  appear  unti 1:

Richard  Platek. Foundations  of  Recursion  Theory, Stanford  Ph.D.  Thesis  (1965).  unpublished.

It  was  from  Platek  in  1963  that  the  author  learned  the  usefulness of  a  more  abstract  approach  via  monotonic  functions. Platek discusses  the  continuous  theory,  but  not  in  as  much  detail  as the  transfinite  recursions. Very  recent  work  on  abstract  forms of  recursion  theory  has  been  done  by  Wagner, Strong,  Friedman, and  Moschovakis. The  explicit  connections  will  have  to  be discussed  elsewhere.

During  the  spring  and  summer  of  1969  the  author  worked jointly with  J.  W. deBakker  of  Amsterdam  on  an  "algebraic" theory  of  program  schemata  and  at  that  time  realized  that  the calculus  of  monotonic  and  continuous  functions  was  exactly appropriate  to  t.his  study. It  was  a  question  of  David  Park about.  justifying  a  rule  of double  induction in  this  calculus together  with  a conversation  with  Robin  Gandy  at  Oxford  on formulae  as  operators  that  brought  forward  the  idea  that  the calculus  should  be  extended  to  higher-type  function  spaces.

In  t.he  meantime,  during  the  fall  of  1969  at  Oxford,  the author  was  working  with  Christopher  Strachey  on  his  theory of semantics  of  programming  languages  via  Land  R-values  and  an abstract  model  of  storage. Woe attempted  to  apply  the  formalism of  the  calculus  of  recursive  functionals  of  higher  types,  but were  very  much  hampered  by  the  necessity  of  having  to  store representations of  functions  rather  than  the  functions  themselves. Having  been  brought  to  the  right  abstract  level  by  the  previous

work,  the  author  was able  to  then  conjecture  that  there  might very  well  exist  structures  with  the  proper  self-referential "storage"  properties. And  he  subsequently  was  able  to  offer  a rigorous  mathematical  construction  which  was  finally  cast  into the  realm  of  lattice  theory  on  account  of  the  simplicity  and familiarity  of  that  study, The  result  was to  provide  a mathematical  basis  for  the  previously  employed,  entirely  formal use  of  the  A-calculus by Strachey.  Landin  and  others. It  was this  success  that  showed  that  the  lattices  provided a simple and  general  enough  context  to  develop  a  recursion  theory  in­ volving  not  only  the  previously  studied  structures  connected with  the  integers  and  the  Teals,  but  also  some  quite  new structures. And  these  new  structures  seem  to  be  naturally requiTed  by  programming  language  semantics  besides  having mathematical  interest. How this  connects  with  McCarthyt s program  for  a  mathematical  theory  of  computation  will  require further  discussion  in  a  future  publication.
